
[Illustration]

[Illustration: _See description on page XI_]


CANDY-MAKING REVOLUTIONIZED

_CONFECTIONERY FROM VEGETABLES_

BY MARY ELIZABETH HALL


          _ILLUSTRATED_

          New York
          STURGIS & WALTON
          COMPANY
          1912

          _All rights reserved_

          COPYRIGHT, 1912, BY
          PERRY MASON COMPANY

          COPYRIGHT, 1912, BY
          STURGIS & WALTON COMPANY

          Set up and Electrotyped. Published, December, 1912

                       TO
                  ONE ELIZABETH,
          AND ALL ELIZABETHS WHO LOVE PURE
               CANDY AND ITS MAKING




CONTENTS



  Chapter                                 Page
  INTRODUCTION                              i

  PREFACE                                  vi

  SECTION I

      I FOR THE NOVICE                      3

     II FOR THE CANDY-MAKER'S TABLE         8

    III THERMOMETER                        19

     IV USE OF STEAM                       24

      V CRYSTALLIZATION                    27

     VI CHOCOLATE COATING                  33

    VII SUGAR                              41


  SECTION II

  VIII DECORATIVE CANDIES

            I From Potato Paste            52
               Green Leaves                56

           II Violets
               Pop-corn Violets            57
               Cocoanut Violets            58
               Violet Boutonniere          59

          III From Potato Fondant
               Uncooked Fondant            61
               Cooked Potato Fondant       62
               Modeled Candy               62
               Coloring                    64
               White Daisy                 66
               Yellow Daisy                69
               Calla Lily                  69
               Red Apples                  70
               Single Roses                72
               Rose Buds                   74
               New Potato                  75
               Pea-Pod                     76
               Snow Ball                   76
               Grapes                      79
               Other Possibilities         79

           IX POTATO CARAMEL
               Potato Caramel No. 1        81
               Potato Caramel No. 2        82
               Potato Caramel No. 3        82
               Opera Caramel               83

            X POTATO--MISCELLANEOUS
               Mocha Walnuts               84
               Pecan Creams                85
               Raisin Creams               85
               Peppermint Chocolates       86
               Celtic Almonds              86
               Chocolate Bars              87
               Vegetable Cream             88

           XI SWEET POTATO
               Sweet Potato Patties        90
               Sweet Potato Knots          91
               Sweet Potato Pastilles      93

          XII PARSNIP
               Candied Parsnips            93
               Parsnip Boutonniere         95

         XIII CARROT
               Carrot Rings                97
               Crystallized Carrot         98
               Carrot Roll                 98
               "Gingers"                   99
               Garden "Ginger"             99
               Variations                 101

          XIV BEAN
               Candied Green Beans        102
               Bean Taffy                 103
               Nut Bean Taffy             104

           XV BEET
               Frosted Beet Slice         105
               Beet Puffs                 106
               Beet Cubes with Variations 107
               Crystallized Beets         108
               Spiced Beets               109
               Spiced Beet Bon-bons       109

          XVI TOMATO
               Tomato Marshmallow         110
               Chocolate Marshmallow      112
               Vegetable Nougatine        112
               Chocolate Nougatine        114
               Nut Bur                    114

         XVII CORNLETTE
               Nut Cornlettes             118

        XVIII ONION COLD TABLETS          120

          XIX ORIENTAL PASTE              123
               Seaweed                    124

           XX STUFFED FRUITS
               Dates for Candy            128
               Sparkling Dates            128
               Chocolate Covered Dates    129
               Date Brilliants            129
               Rhubarb Marmalade          129
               Sugared Dates              130
               Stuffed Dates              130
               Stuffed Prunes             130

          XXI ANGELIQUE
               Rings                      132
               Orange Rings               133
               Angelique as a Plant       133
               Preserved Green Angelique  135
               Dried Angelique            135

         XXII FOR THE CATERER             136

        XXIII FOR THE TEACHER             142




ILLUSTRATIONS


    VEGETABLE CANDIES      Frontispiece
    OPPOSITE PAGE
    FASCINATING TO THE CHILD      72
    BOXED VEGETABLE CANDIES       98
    DECORATIVE AND EDIBLE        118
    ANGELICA ARCHANGELICA        132
    FOR THE CATERER              138




INTRODUCTION


When Mary Elizabeth Hall first brought her discovery to my attention, I
thought that it was indeed one that would revolutionize candy-making,
both that of the amateur at home and of the manufacturer. And, in the
months that have followed, to this belief has been added the conviction
that this revolution is one very much worth while. Why so simple and
obvious a discovery was not made long ago is a mystery to me; perhaps
its very simplicity and obviousness is proof of its importance.

Of cookery, candy-making is a branch which is entitled to more dignity
than it ordinarily receives. Negatively and positively, the importance
of sweets to the child can hardly be over-estimated. If he consumes a
quantity of impure confectionery, his digestion will be ruined for life;
how much of the confectionery bought is rankly impure it is well for the
mother's peace of mind that she does not know! On the other hand, if the
child is not given sweets, he is deprived of a food element of the
greatest value to his development. And for the adult, the value of pure
candy is too obvious to warrant comment.

Vegetable candy, to my mind, is ideal confectionery. Of its purity,
there can be no doubt. Moreover, it furnishes the valuable element of
sugar so combined with nutritious vegetable bases that, because of the
bulk, there is no temptation to overeat. This quality of the new
confection would seem insurance against the evil effects of gluttony!
Before an undue amount of sugar is consumed, the very mass of the
vegetable base has satisfied the appetite.

Many sorts of vegetable candy have unusual keeping qualities; indeed,
some kinds will retain their flavor and moisture for as long as a year.
It is significant to note that almost all non-vegetable confections that
can be successfully stored for any length of time contain artificial
preservatives; vegetable candy, however, keeps, not because of the
addition of alcohol or even benzoate of soda, but because of the
excellence of the processes themselves.

Notwithstanding its advantages, vegetable candy is no harder to make
than is any other good candy. For success in any sort of cookery, much
hard work is necessary; slipshod methods and intuition can not produce
food that is up to standard. Of even greater force is this rule when
applied to the most delicate brand of cookery--the making of
confectionery. Miss Hall has supplemented her major discovery by several
other valuable discoveries--or "adaptations," as she modestly styles
them. Her use of crystallization, for instance, enables the amateur
confectioner to secure results which were previously out of her reach.

Aside from its virtues from the hygienic, dietetic and practical points
of view, the new confectionery has much to commend it. By utilizing the
common and cheap vegetables of the home garden, it gives to the girls
and women on the farm and in the village an opportunity that previously
was not theirs. This discovery means that they can now make the finer
sorts of candy, the fashioning of which was formerly out of the question
to women who did not have at their command the resources of the
specialty stores of the large city--and plenty of money to spend in
them. This enlargement of the culinary horizon of these countless women
is not without broad significance; the removal of their
limitations--petty and otherwise, if you will--is necessary before we
shall cease to tremble because they who belong on the farm and in the
village refuse to stay there. Once banish the discontent of the farm
woman, and there is no rural problem of consequence. And vegetable
candy-making is not without sociological importance because it is a
step--though, perhaps, a very short one, comparatively!--in that
direction.

More definite, however, is another field for speculation in connection
with vegetable candy. It offers to the housewife, house-daughter, and to
the teacher a new modeling medium. That from a cheap and easily made
base attractive objects may be made--and then eaten--surely is a
recommendation of no slight moment. Miss Hall's discovery has placed
within easy reach of persons of moderate means and skill a medium
through which really beautiful objects can be made in candy. For the
first time, the amateur candy-maker can prove for herself that
candy-making is not only an art, but that it is one of the fine arts.

                                                WARREN DUNHAM FOSTER.




PREFACE


The years of work in candy-making that have made possible this book, I
now look back upon with a certain feeling of satisfaction. The
satisfaction comes from the knowledge that because of the discovery that
is here recorded, the candy of the future will be purer, more wholesome,
more nourishing than that of the past has been. Even if the processes
that are here set forth fail of the widest adoption, I have still the
satisfaction of knowing that just so far as they are adopted will there
be greater healthfulness of confectionery.

Another reason for the satisfaction that I feel is my knowledge that my
discovery has opened to the home candy-maker a whole new world.
Previously many of the better sorts of confectionery--particularly of
the decorative kinds--were out of her range, either because of the cost
of the necessary ingredients or the difficulty of their purchase or
handling; particularly under a heavy disadvantage has been the village
or country cook who has not had the service rendered by the specialty
stores of the great cities. Now, however, with the ever present potato
substituted for marzipan--hard to obtain at more a pound than potatoes
cost a peck!--it is the girl or woman with her own garden who has the
advantage. Moreover, decorative candies that formerly required more
skill than most amateur confectioners possess can now be made by anyone
who can model clay or use a cooky cutter. Mothers who formerly were all
too often required to gratify their children's longing for candies that
told a story--candies modeled or otherwise decorative--by giving them
boughten confectionery that contained plaster of Paris, aniline dyes and
other ingredients equally harmful, can now in their own kitchen from
nourishing and harmless vegetables fashion sweets that are just as
beguiling to childish eyes.

Nor is this all. Children invariably have a craving for sweets that if
allowed to run its course is almost sure to lead to indigestion and
worse. On the other hand, if this craving is not satisfied, the children
will be deprived of a food of the utmost value--a food element, indeed,
that it is indispensable. Vegetable candy offers an ideal solution of
this difficulty. Sugar it of course contains, but the vegetable base
supplies no small part of the bulk; consequently children may eat their
fill of it and satisfy their natural longing for candy without having
gorged themselves with sugar. Moreover, the vegetable base has virtues
that are positive as well as negative; it itself supplies valuable food
elements and equally valuable vegetable salts.

Many colors and flavors are made available by this discovery. The use of
beets, for instance, has added to the candy-maker's palette a very
attractive new shade. Each vegetable contributes at least one new
flavor. Novel as are candies made from vegetables, they must not be
thought faddish. Caramels, marshmallows and bon-bons and all the rest
are here; tastes that have already won favor are here, and many new ones
as well.

In places, perhaps, the directions that follow may seem over detailed.
Invariably, however, I have tried to give information about all the
points that would come to the mind of the amateur confectioner. I have
tried to tell the _why_ as well as the _what_. Moreover, the processes
at times may seem, perhaps, a bit over long. It should be noted,
however, that vegetable candy-making is no more complicated, if as much
so, as is the making of any other confectionery. Good candy invariably
means effort, and intelligent painstaking effort at that.

It has been with the home candy-maker in mind that I have written this
book. Undoubtedly, however, the discovery will appeal to the
professional. I am glad, for the more vegetable candy is made, the less
unhealthful confectionery there will be consumed. For the same reason, I
hope, too, that women and girls seeking to make profitable their idle
hours at home, may embark in a small way in the manufacture and sale of
vegetable candy.

My thanks are due to _The Youth's Companion_ for its kind permission to
reprint material that first appeared on its Girls' Page--a department
that, together with Family Page and Boys' Page, has done much for
better living throughout the nation.

No doubt I have been garrulous concerning my own discovery, but I trust
that the privilege of garrulity will be granted to the woman who has
been a pioneer and who, after suffering the hardships that are always
the lot of the pioneer, has, as she believes, opened up a whole new
world in candy-making and a very good world at that!

                                                M. E. H.

   BOSTON, MASS.,
      June 12, 1912.




KEY TO FRONTISPIECE


           1 Green Leaf
           2 Violet
           3 Wild-Rose With Angelique Leaf
           4 Red Star From Potato Paste
           5 Jellies--made from green peas
           6 Carrot Ring
           7 Celtic Almond
           8 Mocha Walnut
           9 Pastille Of Sweet Potato
          10 Frosted Beet Slice
          11 Carrot Ring
          12 Beet Leaves
          13 Daisy--attached to macaroon with a crystal
          14 Pecan Cream
          15 Angelique Ring
          16 Raisin Cream
          17 Heart From Potato Paste
          18 Sweet Potato Knot
          19 Triple Filled Orange Rings
          20 Beet Puff
          21 Nut Bur
          22 Pea-Pod
          23 Cocoanut Beet Square
          24 Red Apple
          25 Yellow Rose--on small round cake
          26 Snow Ball




CANDY MAKING REVOLUTIONIZED




SECTION ONE




I

HELP FOR THE NOVICE


Almost all of the difficulties of the novice in the art of candy-making
come from lack of practice. Although it is a difficult branch of
cookery, experience in its intricacies will overcome many of the
handicaps under which the beginner struggles. It should be carefully
noted that these handicaps apply fully as much to the old-fashioned sort
of candy-making as to the new. The fundamental processes are often the
same. If the beginner in candy-making knows and will follow a few simple
rules, the measure of success that greets her efforts will be largely
increased.

Be accurate. If the rule calls for one-quarter teaspoonful of a
flavoring extract, measure that amount by a measuring-spoon; do not take
up any spoon that happens to be convenient, and pour in what seems to be
about the right quantity. More and more cooks are working by rule and
not by intuition; but in candy-making the caution against inaccuracy is
especially necessary, for the processes are delicate, and subtleties of
flavor and of texture are more evident than in more substantial food.

The weather is of more moment in candy-making than in plain cooking. Do
not try to make candy on a muggy day; the results probably will be
unsatisfactory. But if forced to disregard this warning, attempt but
little, act quickly, and remember that damp weather is the only excuse
for the substitution of intuition for rule. Just why humidity and low
barometric pressure play havoc with the work of the confectioner need
not be discussed here.

In making confectionery, cleanliness to the point of chemical purity is
highly desirable. Many successful cooks believe that candy should be
made in a pan that has never been used for anything else. That belief,
perhaps, may be extreme, but the fact remains that one cannot be too
careful in regard to the cleanliness of her utensils. And this necessity
for cleanliness holds for any receptacle in which any ingredient is
placed. Note particularly that heating lard will leave a taint which
will spoil the delicacy of flavor of candy made in the same dish.

Very often it is desirable that liquids remain hot after the actual
cooking has been done. The ordinary stove gives too much heat for the
purpose, and the confectioner's "working slab"--a device moderately
heated by steam--is expensive. A cheap and effective substitute,
however, is a humble soapstone. Use marbled cloth instead of waxed paper
to dry candy upon. Then there will be no danger that little particles of
the paper adhere to the candy. Candied fruit and similar confections,
however, should be drained on nickeled wire netting as explained in
another chapter. Place the netting over a dish, and pour upon it the
whole mass of fruit and syrup. By pouring all of it at once, the coating
of syrup will be uniform: It will dry evenly, as the air will reach all
sides alike. After most of the moisture has evaporated, the fruit will
be ready to be rolled in sugar.

Sprinkle a shallow dish with coarse sugar. Roll each piece of fruit in a
separate place in the dish, taking care that the sugar is absolutely
dry when the fruit is placed in it. If the sugar is damp, it will mat so
that the confection is "mussy" to the eye and unpleasant to the palate.
Moreover, the scales of damp sugar will jar off, leaving a break in the
complete covering which is necessary for the preservation of the fruit.
One rotting piece will contaminate another, until the whole boxful is
unfit for use. If the sugar is properly applied, candied fruit, well
packed, will keep for several weeks without injury.

Pack soft candies in layers separated by waxed papers backed by
cardboard. Remember that the best-made confections will be unappetizing
when presented or served unattractively.

In pulling taffies or other candies, corn starch may be put to good use.
No definite rules can be given, because the temperature and the humidity
of each pair of hands--to put the case euphemistically--are different.
Each time the material is pulled, the candy-maker should dust her hands
as lightly as possible with the corn starch. A moderate amount of it
worked into the mass will do no harm, but care must be taken not to use
so much that the candy becomes starchy. Moreover, a heavy coating of the
starch does not protect the hands any more than does a light dusting.

While the candy is being pulled, it should be handled as little as
possible. Let the candy's own weight over the hook do the real work. To
avoid "bunchiness," the confectioner must keep the mass moving in
uniform thickness--a difficult task, success in which comes only from
practice.




II

FOR THE CANDY-MAKER'S TABLE


For real success in candy-making the amateur needs a few small utensils
similar to those that have long been used by confectioners. The advice
which follows can be as well applied to old-fashioned candy making as to
the new sort.

A copper bon-bon dipper, really nothing more than wire twisted so as to
outline a spoon, will be found convenient for any sort of dipping likely
to be attempted in the home kitchen. The wire dipper is a much more
satisfactory tool than a silver fork, the implement usually recommended
for this purpose.

Get fourteen inches of copper wire--preferably number eighteen--heavy
enough to bear a few ounces of weight without bending, but soft enough
to be shaped easily by the fingers. A quarter-pound spool should not
cost over ten cents. Grasp the wire five inches from one end and bend
it double at that point. The double strand--which makes the handle--will
then be five inches long, and the single four. Out of this single
strand, beginning half an inch from the end of the doubled strand, form
a loop three-quarters of an inch long. Twisting the wire round the
forefinger or a small empty spool will make the loop. Wind the two
inches of wire left free about the two parallel strands, carrying it up
as far as it will reach.

This skeleton spoon is excellent for dipping bon-bons, fruits or nuts.
To hold objects of different sizes, the soft copper wire may be bent
easily; and in this respect the home-made dippers are better than the
nickeled ones on the market. For dipping creams into chocolate, this
dipper is probably the best device which is available for the amateur.

Another help is the so-called rubber mat, useful for modeling wafers and
centers. This is nothing more than a sheet of heavy rubber fabric,
stamped so that molds are formed. Before using, place the mat in cold
water, dry, and then pour the fondant into the depressions until they
are entirely filled. When the fondant is dry enough to hold its form,
the mat is turned upside down, and the wafers and centers easily freed.
After being washed in cold water and carefully dried, the mat is ready
for use again.

[Illustration: Rubber Mat. Fig. 1]

The advantage of the mat is that all the candies are of the same size
and regular in shape, and that no material is wasted. For the girl who
intends to get only one mat, the kind with round molds--"truncated
cones," to be accurate--is the best to buy, because it may be used
equally well for centers or wafers. See Fig. 1 above.

The candy-maker who is prepared to spend more for her equipment may well
buy several mats, each with molds of different shapes. Then she should
reserve one shape for each flavoring or mixture, so that she can easily
distinguish by sight different kinds of creams after they are made. The
mats are sold by weight, generally at the rate of a dollar and a half a
pound. The one shown in Fig. 1 weighs eighteen ounces.

[Illustration: Dropping Funnel. Fig. 2]

Either to fill molds or to drop masses upon slabs or waxed paper in the
old way, the candy-maker will find a dropping funnel useful. This is a
small tin cornucopia with a long handle. Whittle a clean stick so that
one end of it will fit into the outlet of the funnel, and plug the hole
from above. Fill the funnel with the mass to be dropped, and then raise
the stick just long enough to allow enough of the mass to run out to
fill the mold--or if the old plan is followed, to form a wafer or cream
of proper size. See Fig. 2, on the preceding page.

Intelligent operation of the funnel makes the work more rapid and
accurate, and the mass holds its heat longer, and is kept better mixed
than if poured or spooned from a dish. Funnels especially made for this
purpose cost from twenty-five cents to one dollar; but any tinsmith can
easily make one out of an eight-inch piece of heavy tin, shaped so as to
form a cornucopia, with the smaller opening not more than three-eighths
of an inch in diameter, and attached to a handle at least twelve inches
long.

For heating mixtures, white enamel dishes are preferable to tin or
aluminum. For mixing, wooden spoons are better than metal ones, because
the mass which is being stirred does not stick so readily. Wooden
paddles are often better yet, for their flat surfaces do not retain
masses so tenaciously.

Perhaps the most useful tool of all is a nameless instrument which does
duty for both knife and spoon, and in addition has virtues all its own.
It is particularly valuable for reaching the corners of pans. This tool
is not on the general market, but can be made by most metal-workers--either
tinsmiths or blacksmiths. A piece of spring steel, about ten inches
long, rounded at the end, and curved as shown in Fig. 3, is riveted into
a wooden handle. Heavy tin may be substituted for the steel, if desired.

[Illustration: Special Knife. Fig. 3]

A molasses-candy or taffy pull without a hook may be good fun, but it is
hard on the candy as well as on the hands. A blacksmith can easily make
the hook of round iron, about a half-inch in diameter and eighteen or
twenty inches long. The rod should be bent until it forms roughly a
letter J, with the tip about seven inches from the horizontal line. The
top--the upper part of the horizontal line of the J--should be pounded
flat, and two holes bored for screws.

Be sure to attach the hook to the wall firmly, and about level with the
shoulders. Hooks may be purchased for about fifty cents apiece, but
those made by the blacksmith will do as well. Even with the hook, it is
well to wear canvas gloves, so that the mass can be handled hotter, and
in a more hygienic fashion than with bare hands. Canvas gloves are
easily laundered--something which cannot be said of the expensive
buckskin gloves recommended for this purpose.

For use in "cutting in" fondant and other small masses it is well to buy
a four inch wall paper knife--a tool which can be bought for from ten to
twenty-five cents. Fondant should never be beaten, but instead it should
be "cut in." This process is scraping up the whole mass, folding it over
and cutting through with the knife. This motion is repeated, from each
side of the pan, until the fondant becomes a ball which can be kneaded
by the hand.

Procure smooth iron bars, two fifteen inches long and two eighteen
inches long, all three-eighths of an inch thick and two inches wide. Any
blacksmith shop can furnish them at slight expense, or they may be
purchased more cheaply from the confectioner's supply stores. The bars
are to be placed--set on edge--in the form of a rectangle on a marble
slab. Be sure that the bars are carefully smoothed, for otherwise they
will be untidy and soon rust. By lapping the edges and moving the bars
back and forth, a receptacle of any size desired can be made. After
buttering slab and bars, pour the candy into the enclosure. When it has
cooled, remove the bars, and with one sharp incision cut the candy clear
across. Use a sharp knife of uniform thickness and width, preferably
with a thin blade.

It is also convenient to have two bars six inches long. They are useful
in dividing a batch when different flavors or colors are used. The
partitions will be useful for dividing the filling from the outside
layers when a three-storied candy is to be made.

The need for these bars comes from the fact that one should never cut
candy in a pan. The attempt to do so will always result in pieces with
crumbling edges, as the knife has to be dragged through the candy
instead of cutting down sharply, and as the sides of the pan allow no
room for the expansion which the width of the knife will cause.
Moreover, there is always waste in the corners and at the sides.

The candy-maker should appreciate the palette knife. The flexibility of
the blade is such that it can be put to many uses for which the ordinary
knife is unfitted. For instance, with a palette knife it is possible to
coax refractory substances from the corners and edges of pans. Because
of this flexibility, it is particularly useful in lifting modeled forms
from a flat surface, as is explained in Chapter VIII.

To the confectioner, one of the most useful tools is a modeling stick.
This small tool is of great value to the candy-maker. It can be grasped
easily and its shape allows of its use at many angles that would be
inconvenient or impossible for a less adaptable tool. The roundness of
the blunt end serves many purposes; the straighter side is particularly
useful for smoothing off work, and the inside curves lend themselves to
a great number of processes.

Wire screens, often known as "wire baking forms," are very useful for
drying candies that have been sugared or for draining confections that
need to be exposed to the air. Those that are oblong in shape are much
more convenient than the round ones. The wires forming the screens cross
at distances of about one-sixteenth of an inch, making really a coarse
sieve. The sides extend up about one-half inch. The screens make
excellently ventilated trays, but for candies that come from an ordinary
crystal the mesh is too fine to allow proper draining. Should the
crystal be very thin, however, the screen can be used for draining,
provided the pieces are well separated and placed only one layer deep.

Wire racks for the drying of candy are among the necessary equipment of
the candy-maker. These may be had in varying degrees of fineness, the
wires forming squares of from three-eighths to three-quarters of an
inch. Squares of one-half inch and under give the best support for
confections, however, and allow ample room for draining. If the candies
are small or soft the large squares give insufficient support. The racks
are without sides, the edges being formed either by a heavy wire or a
metal binding. The supports are made by wires bent down at the ends and
at the center. These racks are the same as the "cake coolers" of
ordinary cookery.

Another method of drying particularly useful for models and cream
centers is a bed of corn starch. Do not use this plan with any
confection the surface of which is wet from the application of pastes.

As the basis for this process buy two or three packages of a cheap grade
of corn starch. The corn starch can be kept ready for use by
occasionally drying it out and sifting it.

Spread the corn starch in a large shallow pan or tray thick enough to
hold the weight of your candy. This gives a non-resisting surface which
keeps the models in form and when dry the corn starch will easily brush
off.

By all odds the most valuable tool for the confectioner, amateur or
professional, is the candy thermometer. Its use is so important that the
following chapter is devoted to a discussion of it.




III

THE CANDY THERMOMETER


For real success in candy-making, the home confectioner needs a candy
thermometer. As is emphasized throughout the volume, accuracy is of the
greatest importance in candy-making. Cooking must stop at just the right
moment, or the candy is either harmed or actually spoiled. Until the
last few years, for the amateur, the only tests to determine the
completion of cooking have been known as "thread," "soft ball," "hard
ball," "crack" and "hard crack." While the candy-maker has been
struggling with these unsatisfactory tests, the candy has kept on
cooking, perhaps until it has reached the next stage of temperature,
changed texture, and so become unfit for the use for which it was
intended.

The professional confectioner has long been able, by the use of a
thermometer, to determine just how hot his candy was and to remove it
from the heat at exactly the right moment. His thermometer, however, was
not only too expensive for the amateur, but also too long to be used
except in a large vat. There are now on the market, however,
thermometers that the amateur confectioner or small manufacturer can use
to advantage. Even when hardware dealers do not keep the thermometers in
stock, they can--and will--order them from their jobbers. The
instruments, of which there are several makes, are about nine inches
long, and sell for from one dollar to two dollars and fifty cents. Most
of these instruments register from about eighty degrees to three hundred
and eighty degrees Fahrenheit, although the range which interests
candy-makers most is only from two hundred degrees to three hundred and
twenty degrees. There are a few facts which the girl confectioner who
uses a thermometer should keep in mind.

Buy a thermometer which is guaranteed by its maker. See that the
markings are so well defined that they can be read easily. Before use,
the thermometer must be regulated to conform to the local altitude.
Place the thermometer in a kettle of water, heat, and let it boil for
ten minutes. If the mercury marks two hundred and twelve degrees, the
thermometer is correct as it is, but if there is a variation of two
degrees or more, allowance must be made. If water boils at two hundred
and ten degrees, two degrees must be subtracted every time the
thermometer is read. Then "soft ball" means two hundred and thirty-six
degrees, not two hundred and thirty-eight degrees, as it would had the
water boiled at the normal two hundred and twelve degrees, or two
hundred and forty degrees, as it would had the water boiled at two
hundred and fourteen degrees. Do not think that a variation of even two
degrees is too slight to count; absolute accuracy is essential.

For safety in transit, manufacturers often pinch together the case of
the instrument so that the scale-piece can not work loose and become
broken. A very little tinkering with the copper jacket, however, will be
sufficient to free the scale-piece. This must be done, not only so that
the thermometer can be cleaned readily, but so that, when the mixture to
be tested is shallow, the dial can be pushed out in order that the bulb
can be covered by the hot mass. Unless the bulb is covered, the
thermometer will not register correctly.

Allow the thermometer to become hot gradually; do not thrust a cold
instrument into boiling water. Do not remove the thermometer to read it,
as it quickly changes. Read it with the eye on the level. Remember that
mixtures which require stirring must be stirred below the thermometer as
well as elsewhere. Be sure that the thermometer is clean. Each time
after it has been used push the dial out of the copper case and wash
both thoroughly. Do not neglect the back of the piece of metal to which
the tube is attached. Be particularly careful after mixtures which
contain milk or cream. This removable scale is a great convenience.

The amateur candy-maker will be glad to know that sugar and water will
not burn until all the moisture is evaporated, and that does not happen
until three hundred and fifty degrees is reached. If, however, she is
making an unusually small quantity, and the thermometer begins to climb
above three hundred degrees--beware! The large quantity, however, will
take care of itself because of the moisture it contains.

Below is a table which will enable one to interpret the old stages in
terms of degrees. Fortunately most candy thermometers have this
information stamped upon their dials.

          310°--Hard Cracked
          290°--Cracked
          254°--Hard Ball
          238°--Soft Ball
          230°--Thread

In the following pages it is assumed that the cook has a thermometer. If
she has not, the degrees given may be translated into the old stages and
the old tests used. Thus, if the directions read "cook to two hundred
and thirty-eight degrees," the confectioner who has no thermometer will
stop the cooking when a portion of the mass will "form a 'soft ball' in
cold water." If the directions read two hundred and thirty-six degrees,
the "soft ball" must be softer; if two hundred and forty degrees, the
"soft ball" not so soft. Thus, without the thermometer, the thermometer
readings form a scale which makes easier the application of the old
tests. Be it noted that the thermometer is no more necessary in
vegetable candy-making than in the traditional sort.




IV

THE USE OF STEAM IN CANDY-MAKING.


Steam may be used so that it will be of much help to amateur
candy-makers, few of whom realize its possibilities. These
possibilities, which range from actual cooking to the maintenance of the
minimum of heat, may all be grouped under four processes.

First, to steam: Steaming is cooking by moist heat but not immersing the
material in the water as in the boiling process. It should be followed
to soften dried fruits or other ingredients, as often required by candy
receipts. The best way is to place the materials upon a rack supported a
couple of inches above the water in the cooking vessel, covering it
tightly and placing it on the fire. The confined vapor will soon soften
whatever is within the vessel.

Second, the double boiler: The double boiler is of particular value
when protective cooking is desired. This method will hold all juices
present but neither adds moisture nor dries out existing moisture as
happens when the mixture is over a direct blaze. In this way, the
materials can be heated without burning. It is of particular value with
materials that need heat but need no further moisture--simply the
development of that moisture which they already have.

Third, a modification of the use of the double boiler by leaving off the
cover: Thus the temperature is lowered and the actual cooking operation
lengthened. Vapors that may arise from the cooking mass are allowed to
escape instead of being absorbed.

Fourth, the steam bath: The steam bath is obtained by placing the
receptacle containing the mass over a smaller vessel containing boiling
water. In this way, the steam is applied only to the bottom of the
receptacle and its intensity may be varied. The lowest possible heat may
be applied; temperatures far below the boiling point, or even the
cooking point, are made possible. The temperature of the upper dish is
regulated by the distance from the direct heat of vessel containing the
water. Always start with boiling water so that the material treated will
be affected only by the heat of the steam and not the direct heat which
is bringing the water to the boiling point. This method is particularly
valuable for keeping fondant and other masses moderately hot for
dipping, or for melting chocolate or bon-bon creams, which should be
melted at less than one hundred degrees.




V

CRYSTALLIZATION


One often wonders why the candy-eating public has the chocolate habit.
The answer is simple. The manufacturer generally offers the public
chocolates. To one not conversant with candy-making, it is not so easy,
however, to explain why the candy-maker offers the chocolates largely to
the exclusion of other confections. To the initiated, however, the
matter is simple indeed. Chocolate makes an air-tight covering that
protects all sides alike. It makes it possible to keep candy not
intended for immediate consumption and to ship it from one place to
another without injury. Without it, the manufacturer would be in a bad
way indeed. The confectioner, then, has fostered the chocolate habit
because it is useful to him.

Crystallization enables the candy-cook to put ordinary cream and sugar
mixtures into good society dress and make them a pleasure to the people
who are not devoted to chocolate. Although the crystal coated confection
may not stand some of the harder tests that the chocolate coated candy
will withstand, it will be found sufficiently reliable to mark a very
great advance in candy-making, particularly in home candy-making. And
after all, the basic mixtures in home-made candy are not so very
different from those in the candy of the professional manufacturer. The
home candy-cook, the small maker and the professional manufacturer, who
is, of course, far better equipped for crystallizing than either of the
others, can, after a careful study of the different degrees of sugar
crystallizing, make almost any candy as satisfactory in texture and
appearance, and as easy to handle, as are the chocolate confections. A
sufficient number of dippings in the crystal accomplishes the result.
"One part water and three parts sugar," is the slogan of the
crystallizer. This is the composition of any crystal syrup. Although
crystal syrups differ only in the temperature to which they are raised,
their foundation is invariable. As long as the proportions are kept the
same, the quantities do not matter much--theoretically. Practically,
however, one cupful of sugar and one-third of a cupful of water is about
as much as can be handled effectively at one time. The success of the
process lies in repeated dippings. With each immersion, the confection
takes to itself a little more syrup; it thus acquires a heavier coating
of the protective covering. The actual process is very simple. Each
piece is separately dropped into the syrup and, after thorough
immersion, is lifted out with a wire dipper, the surplus syrup allowed
to run off, and placed for drying upon a wire screen.

In the pages that follow, frequent use is made of crystallization. In
each case, the degree to which the syrup is to be heated is given.

It must be understood, be it noted, that this simple crystal dipping
does not make the candy; it merely adds a protective and beautifying
covering. The candy, already complete in a way, is dipped into the
mixture of sugar and water. In the process that follows, however, the
crystallization is of a different and more fundamental sort. In this
second case, the crystallization is the method of making the candy
completely.

For small candies, a novel modification of French hand crystallization
is useful because the process can be put to good use in the many sorts
of candy-making. The candy-cook can well afford to make herself master
of it. She should know, however, that the process is not so difficult as
the description of it would indicate. Although the labor must be done on
six successive days, the work requires but a very few moments except
upon the first day.

The result desired is a slow crystallization which thoroughly cooks the
base so treated and preserves it perfectly. In addition, the process
ensures an appearance attractive to the eye and a flavor equally
attractive to the palate.

A drying rack and a pan are the only utensils that are necessary. They
should be of a size so that the rack will drop about one-half way into
the pan and be upheld by the sloping sides. Note that the pan must be
reserved for crystallization. If it is used for other purposes, it is
likely to absorb flavors that will work havoc with the delicate
confectionery that is placed within it.

Make a syrup by boiling one part of water and three parts of granulated
sugar for ten minutes. Thereupon place in it the base to be treated by
this process. That all the pieces may be very thoroughly separated, stir
the mass carefully with a wooden paddle; it is absolutely necessary that
all the surfaces of all of the mass come into direct contact with the
hot syrup. All that is necessary, however, is that each piece be
thoroughly immersed in the hot syrup; in a surprisingly short space of
time, the little pieces of confectionery will be heated through.

Have the rack in position in the pan; over it, pour the hot mass--syrup
and all. See that the candy is evenly distributed over the rack.
Immediately place a board over the pan; a molding board will do very
well indeed. If a tin cover were used in place of the wooden, the steam
would condense and drop back on to the candy instead of being absorbed.
After the pan has been left undisturbed for a full day, lift the rack
out and pour the syrup into a suitable receptacle, cook to two hundred
and twenty degrees and place in it again the candy. Take the crystal
from the fire. Stir carefully, making sure that each piece is thoroughly
immersed. Place the rack in the pan as directed above, and again pour
over it the syrup with the candy in it. Note, however, that it is
necessary that the wire netting be free from hardened particles of the
syrup. Cleanliness, almost to the point of chemical purity, is
necessary. This process must be repeated four times more, but each time
the mass should be cooked two degrees higher--in each case, twenty-four
hours must elapse between each treatment. After the last operation, the
candy should be allowed to dry on the racks. The result will be found
well worth the time expended.




VI

CHOCOLATE COATING


The ability to handle chocolate successfully is a great assistance to
the maker of vegetable candy. Although chocolate coating is no more an
essential in vegetable candy-making than in the old fashioned kind,
there are very many times when the ability to use it effectively will be
very useful to the confectioner. In either sort of candy-making, it is
but a finish--as acceptable a finish to the one as to the other. Many
people like the flavor of chocolate, and it is extremely serviceable
because it furnishes a uniform covering for confections. Thus, when
chocolate coated candies rub against one another in the box in which
they are packed, their uniformity prevents their taking to themselves
strange flavors and colors. No candy-maker should scorn to make herself
master of the intricacies of chocolate coating.

The best instructor in chocolate coating is a few pounds of chocolate,
firm, well-shaped centers, an allowance of time and interest, plenty of
good common sense and inclination to profit by the hints given below.
With the knowledge that will be accumulated after a few trials, the
candy-maker will soon be able to give to her candy the niceties of the
professional product. The confectioner can well begin with nuts, or some
other hard centers, for they are comparatively easy to handle. By
handling them, she will soon gain the experience necessary to the
successful finishing of other textures. From surprisingly little
experimentation, she will obtain sufficient skill to handle successfully
almost any center that will take the covering.

A thorough general knowledge of the behavior of chocolate and a clear
understanding of the behavior of the stock on hand are of more value
than the methods of application of the coating. Since no two lots of
chocolate are exactly the same, it is well to buy a fairly large supply
at one time. In this way it is possible when handling the first batch
to learn the peculiarities of all the chocolate purchased and thereafter
to handle the stock with assurance. For good results it is well to buy
the regular "coating chocolate" which is sold by many grocery and
specialty stores for just this purpose. If coating chocolate cannot be
obtained, ordinary baking chocolate sweetened with confectioner's sugar
can be substituted, but the substitution is to be avoided, for the
finished work is sure to be inferior.

In all sorts of candy-making, climatic conditions are of the utmost
importance. In no other branch of cooking is the cook so dependent upon
the weather. In muggy weather it is impossible to do good work; often,
indeed, it is impossible to do any work at all. Therefore, it is of the
utmost importance that the confectioner yield respectful obedience to
the humidity.

This warning is of particular weight in connection with the handling of
chocolate. Even if the day is only slightly rainy, or foggy, do not try
to use chocolate. Even experts do not defy this law, but since they
work under commercial conditions, they are generally able absolutely to
control the atmosphere.

The room in which the actual operation of coating is conducted should be
warm and dry. First, break into small pieces more chocolate than you
will actually use in the coating. Put these lumps in a dish set over hot
water and melt them slowly at a low temperature. To do this most
effectually the water should previously have been boiled and the steam
allowed to subside. Of course, the water must be very hot when the dish
with the chocolate is placed over it. As the first piece melts, stir
slowly from time to time. When the chocolate has melted, remove the dish
from the heat and work all of the oil globules from the mass. This is
accomplished not by hard or rapid motion, but by perseveringly and
persuasively smoothing the mass until it is sufficiently cool. These oil
globules, be it noted, must be treated with the greatest respect. If
they become over heated, they are likely to require much more work, even
if they do not ruin the batch.

In studying this melting process, it is well to think of the action of
heat upon butter. Suppose, for illustration, it is desired to cream a
lump of cold butter. If much heat is applied to the butter the outside
immediately becomes running grease. It is possible that the cooler
inside portion of the lump may be beaten into it, but the result will
not be smooth. On the other hand, if the butter is allowed to soften
gradually under the influence of moderate warmth, the whole mass would
melt uniformly and could be beaten into the desired smoothness.

The warning that water must not be allowed accidentally to enter the
chocolate cannot be too often repeated.

Probably this is the surest test as to whether or not the chocolate is
ready for the dipping: Drop a center into the mass so that it will be
covered with the chocolate, remove the surplus either by pulling it over
the edge of the dish, or by shaking, and let the drop fall squarely upon
the sheet of special confectioner's glazed paper, or of oilcloth, or
oiled paper, upon which it is to be cooled. Take care lest the piece
slips when dropped. If it does slip, the base will have a thin
projection that may break off and, even if it does not render the
coating pervious, become unsightly. If the candy-maker is careful and
the coating has been worked sufficiently and has been allowed to become
sufficiently cool, the base will form squarely and evenly and the
chocolate immediately will become firm. In other words, the candies
should begin to set at once without forming projecting bases as soon as
they are dropped upon the sheet upon which they are to dry.

Although chocolates should be covered in a warm room, they should be
cooled as rapidly as possible. As soon as they are finished, they should
be placed upon a small tray and removed to a cool place. The small tray
is desirable since by its use the candies can be quickly transferred. In
summer the tray should be placed in the refrigerator, but should not be
allowed to remain for more than five minutes. If the chocolate coated
confections are kept upon the ice for longer than that time, they will
soon be covered by a sweat that will ruin them.

After the coated drops have become cold, the candy-maker should examine
them carefully. If the bases have spread, she can assume that the
chocolate was not cooled sufficiently or that the surplus was not
effectively removed. If the coating is streaked or light colored, she
will know that the chocolate was not worked sufficiently, or that the
drops did not cool quickly enough after they were coated. If the candy
becomes sticky when it is brought into a warm room, the verdict will be
that the oil was not properly worked into the mass.

In the chapters that follow, there are described many candies that offer
desirable combinations with chocolate. In fact, the vegetable flavors
are quite as adaptable to chocolate coating as are those that have
already won popular attention and favor. Occasionally, in the subsequent
pages, mention is made of the fact that the confection described may
well be covered with chocolate, but more often chocolate coating is not
suggested when it is possible. It is assumed, and no doubt safely
assumed, that the candy-cook, from her experience in the old-fashioned
confectionery, will know what candy can be coated, and what cannot be
successfully coated.




VII

SUGAR


No discussion of candy or candy-making is complete without a statement
concerning sugar--its kinds, value and proper use. Without doubt sugar
is one of the most maligned of foods. It does do damage when eaten at
the wrong time or to excess. From this fact springs one of the great
advantages of vegetable candy; in it the proportion of sugar to the bulk
of the confection is so reduced that the normal craving for sweets is
satisfied without the consumption of a quantity of sugar that insures
disaster.

Experimentation long ago showed that sugar is the quickest source of
energy in the whole list of available foods. No other food approximates
sugar in the ease in which it can be formed into actual body energy.
This fact has long been appreciated by athletes. One case in proof was
that of two school boys seventeen and nineteen years of age, who had
only two hours a day for two months for practice before rowing races in
which both were entered. No change was made in their diet except they
were permitted to eat as much sugar as they wished, sometimes as much as
one-third of a pound a day. One of them, however, did not begin to eat
this excess sugar until the third week of his practicing, when he began
to show the signs of over training--loss of weight and no desire for
either exercise or study. On the third day after beginning the use of
the excess sugar these symptoms disappeared, and he became as vigorous
as the other. Before the time for the race both youths were in the best
of physical condition and were victorious over their antagonists who did
not believe in the use of sugar. Subsequently, observation revealed no
bad after effects. Similar instances could be indefinitely repeated.

The fundamental fact--that sugar gives energy and gives it with great
rapidity--has been made use of by army officers, particularly German.

It must be remembered, however, that sugar is purely an energy-producing
food. It is necessary, then, that there be other foods consumed with it
in order to preserve a proper balance. These other foods, be it noted,
are present in vegetable candy.

The current idea that sugar is fattening is wholly wrong. It is not
sugar that is fattening, but too much sugar. Only when sugar is consumed
in a quantity in excess of that which can be taken care of by the human
commissary department, is it transformed into fat and stored as reserved
material.

The methods of refining sugar have been so perfected within the last few
years that it is safe to say that few food substances in commercial use
are so near to being chemically pure as granulated sugars of good grade.
No less an authority than Blythe says, "Loaf sugar is, as a rule,
chemically pure. It is probably, indeed, the purest of all substances in
commerce, and a large quantity may be burnt up without obtaining a trace
of nitrogen and without leaving any residue. The only sugar that may be
impure are the raw sugars."

It is commonly known that sugar may come from any one of numberless
sources. Sugar of milk is the first sugar with which members of the
human race become acquainted, but one which, of course, is of little
account in candy-making. The sugar of fruits is in an easily accessible
form and one which is of particular value when combined with cane sugar.
Honey as stored by the honey bee formerly was highly prized for food
value, but now that it is so often stored by the factory without any
activity on the part of the honey bee, and now that cane sugar is so
very cheap, it is not so much in demand. For the sugar of candy-making,
there are three sources: the sugar cane, sugar beet and the sugar maple.
For practical purposes, maple sugar may be left out of the discussion.

Ever since sugar has been made on a commercial scale from beets there
has waged a controversy as to the relative merits of beet sugar and cane
sugar. As far as the amateur candy-maker is concerned, however, the
controversy is not of practical interest, for almost all of the sugar
that is sold in small quantities is made from beets. Indeed, it is said
that it is practically impossible for the housekeeper to obtain sugar
made from cane. Moreover, notwithstanding the popular impression that
cane sugar is preferable, scientists insist that in every case the pure
cane sugar, or saccharose, can be crystallized out from either cane or
beet, and that the sugar is identical in chemical composition,
appearance and properties. By no chemical test known to the United
States Department of Agriculture can pure crystallized saccharose from
these different sources be distinguished. The popular impression to the
contrary probably comes from the use of beet sugar that has been
imperfectly purified. It is interesting to note that there are over
ninety grades of sugar known to commerce. The difference between these
grades is often so slight that it is impossible to distinguish without
painstaking laboratory analysis. In this book white sugar and
confectioner's sugar are used wherever possible because they are the
purest kinds. Brown sugar and coffee A., much used in candy-making, are
grades which have not been refined to so high a point.

A word should be said concerning glucose. The complaint which has been
made in connection with glucose has not been made against the substance
itself, but against the way it was used. The amateur candy-maker,
however, often has difficulty in obtaining glucose, even though in some
processes it is most useful.

R. E. Doolittle of the Federal Board of Food and Drug Inspection,
declares that no question of harmfulness has been raised by this board
with respect to the use of glucose in food products. Where glucose is
substituted for sugar and used instead of natural sweetening agents, the
ruling has been made that its presence should be plainly declared upon
the label of the product. The reasons for this action are: (1) where a
manufactured substance is substituted for a natural one it is believed
that the purchaser is entitled to be informed of the substitution; (2)
the cost of glucose is usually somewhat lower than that of sucrose; (3)
glucose consists only in part of a sugar, dextrose, and is inferior to
sucrose in sweetening power.

In this country commercial glucose is manufactured from the starch of
the Indian corn. The starch is suspended in water, the whole placed
into large steam tanks together with some hydrochloric acid, the steam
is turned on to these tanks and the whole brought up to a heavy
pressure. By this means the starch is partially converted into dextrose,
a sugar, and dextrin, a gum. When the conversion has reached the proper
point the pressure is removed, the hot liquid is neutralized with sodium
carbonate, filtered and evaporated to a thick liquid. The resulting
compound contains about 35 per cent. dextrose, about 45 per cent.
dextrin, a small percentage of ash and the rest water.

A word of caution should be given concerning the time of eating sugar.
Obviously if candy is consumed before meals it will destroy the appetite
and interfere seriously with the meal. Obviously, also, it is unwise to
eat heavily of candy before retiring. Notwithstanding her enthusiasm for
vegetable candies the writer feels these cautions should be just as much
observed with vegetable candy as with any other.

The whole question of the amount and form of sugar to be given to
children, is one of utmost importance. Children lose more heat from the
skin for every pound of body weight than do the adults, and because of
this fact, require proportionately more heat. This heat can come only
from food and sugar is the food which produces this heat most directly
and most cheaply. This need for a heat producing food, it could be
urged, could be readily met by the use of fat. The difficulty is that
fat, and particularly fat meat, is generally disliked by the child.
Because of this distaste, his desire for all sorts of sweet things has
undoubtedly a physiological basis. It is necessary, however, to observe
very carefully the digestibility of sugar and sweetened foods in order
to decide to what extent sugar is to replace starch in the dietary. The
effect of sugar upon the appetite for other foods must be given
particular care. Mrs. Mary Hinman Abel, president of the American Home
Economics Association, says that, until a child's stomach is capable of
digesting starch, the needed carbohydrate is furnished in the sugar of
milk. The child a year old who drinks two quarts of milk per day takes
in this way about three ounces of sugar. "As the stomach becomes able
to digest starch," Mrs. Abel continues, "the child is less and less
dependent on the sugar of milk, replacing it with the carbohydrates of
vegetable origin, while the proteids and fat found in eggs, meat, and
cereals take the place of those constituents that were at first
exclusively furnished in milk. Milk, however, remains through childhood
a valuable source of all these food principles.

"The fact that sugar has a high food value is not the only point to be
considered. The child will easily obtain the needed carbohydrates in
other forms and will thrive if the digestion remains sound and its
relish for wholesome food unimpaired. For instance, one often hears it
said that a certain child does not relish milk. In such cases it might
be found that the child's appetite, being sated by sugar in other foods,
is no longer attracted by the mild sweetness of fresh milk, delicious as
it is to the unspoiled palate. It would be well, perhaps, in this
instance, to cut down the allowance of sugar in the hope of restoring
the taste for so invaluable a food as milk. Dr. Rotch insists that the
infant, even in its second year, should never be allowed to taste
sweets. He says, 'When these articles are withheld it will continue to
have a healthy appetite and taste for necessary and proper articles of
food.' Even much later, for the same reasons, the introduction of large
amounts of sugar into the daily food of children is to be carefully
considered. Children do not require a variety of flavors to stimulate
the appetite, but the taste is easily perverted and the backward step is
difficult to take. Those who have studied the food habits of children
seem to agree that sugar should from the very first be withheld from the
dish that forms the staple food of the child--that is, the mush or
porridge of oatmeal or some preparation of wheat or corn. This article
of diet, eaten only with milk or cream, falls into the same class as
bread and milk, and forms the simple, wholesome basis of a meal. The
sugar given the child is better furnished in the occasional simple
pudding, in the lump of sugar, or home-made candy, not that its food
value is better utilized, but the whole food of the child is thus more
wholesome."

Mrs. Mary Hinman Abel concludes her discussion with the statement:
"Sugar is a useful and valuable food. It must, however, be remembered
that it is a concentrated food and therefore should be eaten in moderate
quantities. Further, like other concentrated foods, sugar seems best
fitted for assimilation by the body when supplied with other materials
which dilute it or give it the necessary bulk."

It is this fact, from the point of view of the dietitian, that commends
vegetable candy so highly. The vegetable base gives the necessary bulk
and dilution--in addition to adding other valuable food elements.




SECTION TWO




VIII

DECORATIVE CANDIES


I. FROM POTATO PASTE

Now that the use of vegetable bases is reduced to principles, the
amateur confectioner need have no difficulty in working out in candy
attractive and novel designs suitable to all special days and uses. And
the best of it is--thanks to such a humble vegetable as the potato--she
can follow her own ideas and fashion in confectionery a pattern that is
all her own. Moreover, she can take comfort in the thought that in her
product there is none of the highly injurious ingredients unfortunately
all too common in some decorative candies.

As the foundation for one sort of decorative confectionery, potato paste
must be made. Steam or boil Irish potatoes, drain them, and force them
through a fine sieve,--the finer the better. With one-half cupful of
Irish potato, so prepared, mix one tablespoonful of corn starch.
Gradually and carefully work in enough confectioner's sugar so that the
mixture can be rolled.

The "fine sieve," be it noted, plays a conspicuous and important part in
the making of candy from vegetables. Moreover, it should be borne in
mind that no vegetable particle will either soften in or cook up into
syrup. While cooking, the vegetable particles are just as individual as
though they were in separate vessels; consequently they must be kept
circulating as uniformly as is possible through the syrup in order to
prevent the accumulation of masses of vegetable matter of sufficient
bulk and weight to sink to the bottom of the sauce pan and cause the
mixture to burn. Moreover, should the mixture escape burning, it would
develop gluey spots that would make the finished product lacking in the
smoothness that is the ideal of the candy-cook.

Flavor and color this paste to suit, place it on a surface well dusted
with confectioner's sugar and roll it to the desired thinness. Cut it in
shapes to suit. Cooky cutters or any other tin cutters may be used.
More often, however, the amateur confectioner will prefer her own
design.

Cut a pattern of the desired design from paper, or, if it is to be used
repeatedly, from paste board. Oiling the pattern not only gives it a
firmer edge and prevents tearing but also allows any sugar or paste that
may have adhered to it easily to be wiped off. Lay the pattern over the
paste, and, with a sharp pointed knife, cut along the edges. Lift the
newly cut forms carefully with a thin knife and transfer them for drying
to an oil cloth or, if this cannot be done, to a waxed paper or a tin
very thinly dusted with confectioner's sugar. Do not move them again
until they are dry. If it is desired to pack the candy, cook a
crystal--a "crystal" is a syrup of one part water and three parts
sugar--to two hundred and twenty degrees and after it has cooled five
minutes, dip the confection into it.

It is not essential that the forms be dipped into the crystal nor is the
crystal absolutely necessary to any of the confections that are often
coated with it. All this is explained in Chapter V--Crystallization.

A knife which is of almost constant use in making decorative candies and
which is particularly satisfactory for lifting small forms is a palette
knife such as artists use for mixing their colors. It is thin, flexible
and sufficiently sharp for cutting fondant. Also the blade lends itself
to use in many different positions because its curved shape allows the
hand a degree of freedom not possible with the ordinary knife. The
palette knife is much better for freeing or lifting forms from a flat
surface than a spatula or a case knife.

The imagination of the candy-maker will suggest special designs for
special occasions. The fancy of the confectioner will suggest many
attractive original forms, besides the traditional red and white hearts
for St. Valentine's Day,--note illustration No. 17 in the
frontispiece--the green shamrock for March 17, and the hatchet for
Washington's birthday. Christmas, New Years, Easter, Memorial Day,
Fourth of July, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Hallowe'en and innumerable
local holidays, like Bunker Hill day and Patriots' Day of
Massachusetts,--all of these special occasions offer abundant
opportunity to the candy-maker who realizes that from the paste can be
made representations of anything from a firecracker to a regiment of
soldiers. Cooky cutters may also be used indefinitely; what child would
not like candy in the form of stars, dogs, horses, and trees?

=Green Leaves.=--An excellent illustration of the possibilities of
potato paste is given by green leaves. As the basis for them, color
potato paste green, by the use of green coloring paste, of the harmless
vegetable sort, and flavor fairly strongly with peppermint. Roll the
paste thin, cut out the leaves, using the point of a knife or a tin
cutter, and model the veins. A small, blunt, wooden tool,--even a clean
orange stick will do--should be used to make the depressions that are
the veins. After the leaves have dried on waxed paper, dip into a
crystal cooked to two hundred and twenty-five degrees. Drain them on a
wire rack and dust them evenly with granulated sugar. It is well to use
a thin bladed knife to lift the pieces. See the small box in the middle
of the illustration facing page 98, and No. 1 in the frontispiece.


II. VIOLETS

=Violets.=--In hot weather violets do not take kindly to the "candying"
process, and in cold they are expensive and hard to get. There are no
such limitations, however, to pop-corn and cocoanut. "Violets" made from
them are especially good Christmas candies, because they are decorative
and can be made a month or six weeks in advance--long before the last
rush.

=Pop-corn Violets.=--Using the hard spots for centers, jam and break
well-blown kernels of pop-corn until they resemble violets, as they will
do with more exactness than would be thought. Boil one cupful of sugar
and one-third cupful of water until a syrup is formed; the thermometer
should register two hundred and nineteen degrees. After the syrup is
cool, dip the pop-corn into it, making sure that the liquid forms an
even and complete covering. As a thin crust begins to cover the syrup,
keep pushing it down into the liquid. If this is done the syrup can all
be used before it has time to harden. Immediately after the surplus has
drained off, dredge lightly with powdered sugar, into which has been
worked violet coloring paste, previously moistened with a few drops of
violet extract, or even water. In this case the colored sugar should be
a shade or two lighter than is desired for the finished product, as the
syrup darkens the color.

Note No. 2 of the frontispiece.

=Cocoanut Violets.=--Mix the white of an egg, one-half cupful
confectioner's sugar--the kind sometimes known as XXXX--and one-half
cupful of Irish potato prepared as directed above. This makes more candy
than the home confectioner ordinarily has use for, but directions for a
smaller amount cannot well be given owing to the practical impossibility
of dividing an egg. An easy way out of the difficulty, however, is to
use as much of this mixture as is desired for the violets and to save
the rest for use in making potato fondant, described hereafter.

Flavor this mixture with violet extract. Add the color with the extract,
but remember that a little will go a long way. Use vegetable violet
coloring paste until the color is a shade or two darker than is desired
for the finished product. Stir in cocoanut until all the mass adheres to
the cocoanut. Baker's cocoanut is better than the shredded, but often
the shredded must be used, as the other size is becoming more and more
difficult to obtain. If the shredded is used, break it so that each
piece will not be more than one-half inch long. If the mixture does not
then dry readily, stir in more confectioner's sugar.

To fashion the violets, dip the fingers into cold water, take up a
quantity of the preparation about the size of a violet, and model into
the shape of the flower. A little practice will enable the candy-maker
to form objects that look more like violets than do the flowers
themselves after they have been put through the candying process. Sift
granulated sugar over each flower, shaking off surplus sugar. Dry on
waxed paper. This confection would better be used within two or three
weeks.

=Violet Boutonniere.=--From violets, preferably cocoanut, boutonnieres
very attractive for favors can be fashioned. Have ready a supply of the
violets, candied cress leaves, violet, green or tinsel foil, lace paper
mats,--small paper doilies may be substituted,--and number twenty-two
wire. It is well to cut wires six inches long for they can later be
trimmed or bent to form a stem of from three and one-half to four inches
long. With a fine needle puncture the back of a cocoanut violet and
insert the end of a piece of wire. To make the union firm, place a drop
of thick syrup at the point at which the wire enters the mixture. Seven
violets so treated will be sufficient for one boutonniere. In a similar
manner, wire one less of the crystallized cress leaves. Put all the
wires through the center of the mat. Group the violets about one placed
in the center. As nearly all mats come with an even number of designs in
the edge, it is much easier to arrange the boutonniere if the row of
flowers next the mat contains an even number also. The leaves should be
so arranged in a row underneath the flowers. Before an attractive
arrangement can be made, some little experimenting may be necessary.
Wrap the wires with tissue paper and cover with foil. The making of the
boutonnieres is not so difficult as it sounds, though some knack is
required for the best results.

See the illustration opposite page 72.


III. FROM POTATO FONDANT

=Uncooked Fondant.=--Potato fondant is another base--even more useful
than potato paste--upon which many confections may be built. There are
two kinds--cooked and uncooked. To make the uncooked, boil or steam
Irish potatoes, drain, and force them through a fine sieve. In all
candy-making with potatoes, these directions are of the utmost
importance. Unless the potato is carefully forced through a fine sieve,
the candy made from it will have hard and gluey spots after it has dried
out. Mix one-half cupful of the potato so prepared with the unbeaten
white of one egg. Add gradually confectioner's sugar until the whole
mass assumes the consistency of bon-bon cream. Several uses for potato
fondant will be described below, but it may be substituted for French
fondant in any of the confections of which that is a part.

=Cooked Potato Fondant.=--With one-half cupful of potato, prepared as
for the uncooked fondant, very thoroughly mix two cupsful of sugar and
thin with two-thirds of a cupful of milk. Place the mixture on an
asbestos mat over the fire and cook until thick--to the sticking point.
Pour the mass on a cold, damp marble and "cut in" like plain fondant.
Knead small quantities at a time until the whole batch is smooth. Pack
in tins lined with wax paper.

The fondant can be used without additional sugar and does not stick to
the hands. It is particularly useful as a covering.

=Modeled Candy.=--Modeled candy is easy to make, good to look at and
good to eat. When shaped to imitate fruit or vegetables, it is useful as
table decoration, and is always welcome for children's parties. Indeed,
there is no sort of candy that is surer of a warm welcome by young or
old!

The difficulty has been, however, that modeling with almond paste
requires the use of ingredients that are very expensive and very often
difficult to obtain. This has made experimenting in modeling rather
expensive for the unskilled home candy-maker. Potato fondant, on the
other hand, is inexpensive and so easily obtained that the amateur need
not count the cost of failures while she experiments. By following the
directions carefully very little practice in the modeling will give her
a facility that removes her from the class of unskilled modelers. If she
prefers to use almond paste, the home candy-maker may do her practicing
with potato fondant. Moreover, many young women have studied clay
modeling and to them the modeling of candy is indeed simple. While the
modeled candy that is sold in candy stores often--though not
always--contains harmful substances, potato fondant is absolutely
wholesome.

Potato fondant shows particular superiority over the almond paste in the
making of small objects and all fine and thin work. The results are as
attractive to the palate as to the eye, although candy modeled from
potato fondant does not have the peculiar oily richness of the products
fashioned from almond paste.

For one batch take as much of the uncooked potato fondant as the work
in hand calls for. Into it work all the sugar that it will take. Stop
the kneading just as soon as the mixture shows a tendency to crumble.
Model it into any form desired. It is best not to make the pieces too
large. The modeling may be done with the small clay modeling tool now
common in kindergartens and technical schools, or with a clean orange
stick.

A thin sheet of glass will be found exceedingly satisfactory upon which
to model. As the glass is thin, intricate flowers of many petals, for
instance, can be slipped off with little disturbance. Use a thin knife
to loosen and lift only slightly, slipping each model off with as little
handling as possible. Another advantage is that the glass can easily be
washed.

=Coloring.=--The vegetable coloring pastes which are sold for use in
cooking are harmless. A set of the small jars ordinarily sold for ten
cents a jar will probably be enough for any candy that the amateur may
make in one season. The colors generally in the set are fruit red, leaf
green, golden yellow, caramel, violet, damask, rose, mandarin, orange
blue, salmon and chestnut.

These pastes may be used in three ways. They may be cooked or worked
into a candy mixture or they may be used very much the same as water
color pigments and applied with a brush.

In the first method it is well to remember that the shade should be
mixed a little heavier than desired and must be very thoroughly mixed if
used in fondant or prepared compounds. The rules of color combination
prevail here as everywhere. So if grades of tone or different colors are
desired almost any wish may be met by combination of color.

To get just the tone desired, after mixing the colors dissolve a small
portion in water and then dip into this liquid a lump of sugar. If the
tint is not the right one, it is easily changed.

Any shade of green may be obtained by mixing blue and yellow with leaf
green. All shades of orange are obtainable from yellow and red. All
shades of violet or mauve or even purple for deep violets may be made
from red and blue in different proportions.

If the color in your candy is not clear and uniform it is because it has
not been thoroughly mixed. To avoid spots it must be evenly incorporated
through the entire mass. If this does not seem possible with coloring
paste, dissolve in a little warm water and then add it to the fondant or
prepared compound.

In applying with the brush use the wash methods much as in water color
work and the shading will be much more artistic and the variety much
greater. Apply a medium shade uniformly and let thoroughly dry and then
shade with light and darker tones. Do not use much water, as the surface
of the candy does not absorb the water as does water color paper.

=White Daisy.=--This makes an unusually pretty modeled piece, as will be
seen from the illustration facing page 138, and from No. 13 of the
frontispiece.

White potato fondant is used for the petals and candied orange peel for
the center, and angelique for the stem and leaves.

Flavor the potato fondant with one of the stronger extracts such as
peppermint, cinnamon or cloves. If desired it may be used without
flavoring, but the more delicate flavors are not so pleasing. Mix enough
sugar with the fondant for it to mold smoothly and easily and hold its
shape. Upon a clean piece of glass, or oil cloth, if glass is not easily
obtainable, place a piece of angelique of a size suitable for the stem.
To form the petals roll pieces of potato fondant between the fingers.
Properly arrange these petals around the center. Press a piece of
candied orange peel down upon the stem and petals. This peel gives the
yellow center of the daisy and acts as an additional means for holding
the stem and petals together. Or, yellow fondant may be substituted. Run
a thin knife under the flower and lift it over the glass to an oil cloth
placed over a board or to a piece of waxed paper and dry for twenty-four
hours.

Cook to two hundred and twenty degrees, a syrup made of one cupful of
sugar and one-third of a cupful of water; pour this into a dish so that
the syrup will be about an inch deep. Add to the daisies such leaves cut
from angelique as may be desired and then dip into this liquid and lift
upon a wire rack. In the making of this as in all composite models the
crystal syrup--one cupful of sugar and one-third cupful of water cooked
to two hundred and twenty degrees--is an essential asset for gluing
purposes. A small bristle brush is good for applying, but care must be
used as in using glue not to use too much of the syrup. The syrup, when
dry, will hold the leaves to the stem. If the amateur confectioner is
very conscientious, she may improve the looks of the flowers by coloring
the outside edges of the centers lightly with sugar--first a little
brown and then a touch of yellow placed there with the pointed end of
the modeling stick.

Before the flowers have thoroughly set, free them from the wires of the
rack. Shortly after the dipping, when as much of the syrup as will has
run off the flowers, run the fingers along the under side of the rack
springing the wires under each piece. This method not only frees the
flowers but it rids them of undue accumulations of the syrup. Otherwise,
the wires would dry into the candies, which would be broken upon their
removal. Leave on the rack until dry.

=Yellow Daisy.=--Yellow daisies may be made by coloring the white potato
fondant or by making fresh fondant, using the yolk of the egg in place
of the white. The fondant made of the yolk will not model quite so
readily but coloring is unnecessary.

Form the yellow daisy as the white, but use a small raisin for the
center, instead of the piece of orange peel. No colored sugar is
necessary. Crystallize as before.

If exceptionally bright and clear colors are desired, the flowers may be
dipped twice into a thin crystal instead of once into an ordinary
crystal. Use the same proportions of sugar and water--one cupful to
one-third cupful cooked to only two hundred and twenty degrees. Into
this dip the flowers after they are thoroughly dry, and dry on a rack as
before. The next day dip them again into a crystal of the same sort. Dry
as before. The result will be glossy flowers, free from crystals, with
particularly beautiful yellows and browns.

=Calla Lily.=--This is particularly suitable for Easter time. For the
stem, use a small stick of angelique. Make the center from yellow
fondant. While still moist, dip into granulated sugar. See the
illustration facing page 138.

If the yellow fondant is not on hand, a little of the ordinary white may
be colored yellow and used. It is hardly worth while to make up a batch
of the special egg fondant for one set of lilies.

From the white potato fondant, pat out rather thin pieces, wrap them
around the stem, form the lily and curl the edges and make the pointed
top and the front fold prominent. If leaves are desired, cut a long leaf
from the angelique, dip the stem end into thick syrup and fasten to the
stem. To make a perfect union, cover the stem below the lily with syrup.

If the lilies are to be used for box trimmings, do not make the stems
very long and if leaves are used, bring them up well onto or behind the
flower to give added strength so that the stems will be unlikely to
break at their juncture with the lily.

=Red Apples.=--As dinner favors, red apples are unusually effective. For
the foundation use pulled figs, stuffed with any good mixture. Nuts and
pitted dates may be used for the filling, but the combination is a
little too heavy. Marshmallows and pecan meats are preferable. A third
possibility is chopped nuts and figs. Whatever filling is used, the
method of its insertion is the same. If the figs are dry, steam them
thoroughly. Make a slit in the side, fill with the chosen mixture, and
pinch together the edges of the opening.

As the covering for the figs, uncooked fondant must be used. Cinnamon is
a popular flavoring. Color it with red paste. At this stage in the
process it should not be made the shade desired for the finished
product, but there should be enough of the red to overcome the dead
white of the fondant. In other words, make the first coating much
lighter than it otherwise would be. Into the uncooked fondant, sugar
must be worked until modeling is easy.

Encase the stuffed fig in fondant. The thickness of the coating will
depend upon the size of the fig; the finished product should be about
the size of a real apple. Model the surface so that it looks as much
like an apple as possible. If it is desired to have the confection all
edible, use a piece of angelique for the stem; a twig from a vine or
bush really looks better, however. For the blossom end use a clove. If
the general directions given above are followed, the result will be a
surprising naturalness.

[Illustration: Fascinating to the Child]

Proceeding as directed on page 64, use the vegetable coloring pastes for
the coloring. As the red color paste is likely to have the magenta shade
overmuch, the first coating would better be of orange and the second of
enough dark red to give the true apple red.

To intensify the color and leave the apple glossy, brush it with crystal
syrup cooked to two hundred and twenty degrees. The syrup should be used
while yet warm and should be applied smoothly.

By the use of other colors, other sorts of apples can be made.

Before being eaten, these apples, like real apples, should be cut into
sections.

See the illustration facing this page, and No. 24 of the frontispiece.

=Single Roses.=--They may be pink, red, yellow or white. The process in
each case is the same except for the coloring and the flavoring. Take
as much fondant as is needed for roses of one color and as the base, use
uncooked potato fondant. Divide it into three lots and color with paste
the shade desired--the first so very faintly that its tint is just off
the white, the second a little deeper and the third deeper still. Always
remember that immersion in hot syrup deepens the color. Remember, too,
that the three lots of different shades are for roses of one color only.

For red roses, use cinnamon flavor and red coloring. For yellow roses,
use clove as flavoring and yellow as coloring. Yellow roses are shown as
Nos. 3 and 26 of the frontispiece. Be very careful not to use too much
color. For white roses, use the plain fondant, but after the rose has
dried a touch of green must be added to give depth and character.

For pink roses, use rose water as flavor and pink as coloring.

Whatever the color of the rose, form five petals, curling the edges to
imitate those of the natural rose, and using different shades for
different petals so that the rose will have natural variety of color. At
the center use a small piece of angelique; a touch of darker green
coloring to the center of the angelique gives the rose greater
verisimilitude. It is well to model them upon a sheet of glass and when
completed lift on to a waxed paper to dry.

If the rose is a white one, let it be remembered that it must be shaded
with light green.

When the flowers are dry dip them into a crystal, cooked to two hundred
and twenty-five degrees. Use brown and yellow sugar to imitate the
pollen around the green centers. The pointed end of the wooden tool will
be useful in placing these colored sugars. They must be made to stand
out clearly. If too much syrup has collected around the center, be sure
to push it out with the blunt end of the tool before trying to put the
sugar in place.

After the roses have dried, they are ready to look at and eat.

=Rose Buds.=--From potato fondant, colored as desired, model several
small petals. Cut a piece of angelique to represent the stem and
properly arrange the petals around one end of it and press them on. The
leaves and thorns are to be made from angelique and attached by
pressing them to the stem using the crystal, prepared for the dipping,
as glue.

The calyx, made from angelique, may be also so attached. When the buds
have dried dip them into a crystal cooked to two hundred and twenty-five
degrees. Dry on racks. The crystal will make stronger the union of
petals, leaves, thorns and stem.

=New Potato.=--A particularly appropriate form in which to model the
potato fondant is that of the new potato. Work the proper sized piece of
fondant into as close an imitation as possible of the new potato.

As this new potato has perhaps more of the fondant than many people will
wish to eat at one time, several partial substitutions are possible.
That statement, by the way, is no reflection upon the fondant, for any
piece of candy, no matter how good, of the size of this is likely to be
rather too much to be eaten at one time if of one flavor. Marshmallows,
pitted dates with nut meats, pulled figs closely rolled, or English
walnut meats are some of the things that may well be used as centers.
Whatever is used should be rolled in enough of the fondant to make
pieces of the desired size and form and then immediately rolled in dry
cocoa.

The result will be strikingly convincing--and good to eat.

=Pea Pod.=--From fondant colored green, a pea pod may be modeled, split,
and the peas modeled and placed within. When the forms are dry, dip them
in a crystal made by boiling one cupful of sugar and one-third cupful of
water to two hundred and twenty degrees. Use care that the syrup does
not settle between the peas. Granulated sugar dusted over the pod gives
a beautiful soft color and surface.

=Snow Balls.=--All modeled candies are a delight to children, but snow
balls always meet with a particular favor.

Stuffed figs, prepared as directed for red apples on page 70, form the
basis for them. To keep the color of the figs from showing through,
cover them with the uncooked fondant and roll in the hands until perfect
balls are formed. After the balls have dried two or more hours, roll
them again in this coating of uncooked fondant to which has been added a
small quantity of blue coloring. This is to insure the balls being
snow white. Brush these balls with the unbeaten white of an egg and roll
in equal parts of crystal and granulated sugar.

=Grapes.=--The confection described below and pictured opposite page 72
is good to look at, good to eat, and comparatively easy to make. It
should be borne in mind, by the way, that the directions for candies
often sound more difficult than the actual process.

As the basis for the grapes, take smooth almonds, not blanched. Into the
smaller end of each one insert nickeled wire, pushing it well into the
nut. Then cover the nuts with potato fondant. Work them with the fingers
until they assume the forms of single grapes. Dry in a corn starch bed.
When the forms are dry, brush all the corn starch off. The grapes so
formed should be colored a medium shade by the use of vegetable coloring
pastes to resemble catawba or purple grapes. Because of the opaqueness
of the grapes, they cannot be made to imitate closely the color of green
grapes, but if the confectioner has an unusual fondness for green
grapes, and is not over particular, there is no reason why she should
not attempt them.

After coloring, dry the grapes thoroughly on a wire screen, finish them
in thin crystal, which has been colored somewhat lighter than the shade
the finished grapes are expected to assume. In order to leave the
confection with a glossy surface, it is possible to add to the crystal a
very small quantity of gum Arabic.

After the crystal is thoroughly dry, the wires should be wound with
raffia of the leaf green shade, and, by twisting the wires together, the
single grapes formed into bunches of the size desired. If the
confectioner wishes large bunches, it is well to wind the wires onto a
tree twig, for the sake of the additional firmness. It should be
remembered that the large bunches are heavy. The use of the twig is also
recommended for the natural appearance it gives to the finished bunch.

Brush the stems with a thin syrup. The loose ends of the raffia may be
disposed of and the appearance of the confection made more natural by
dampening them with the syrup and winding them around any round object
of about the size of a lead pencil. The ends of the raffia, so treated,
will resemble tendrils.

In taste, the grapes are much like the usual hard-covered almonds.

=Other Possibilities.=--If the candy-maker has ambition and imagination,
she will regard the foregoing objects as merely suggestive; she will
work out for herself other objects of equal interest. The following
suggestions as to coloring, she will find valuable no matter how much
she may want to create for herself. For pears, use yellow with red; for
peaches, yellow with a very little red; for pumpkins, light orange with
touches of green; for radishes, light red, with green for the stem; for
carrots, orange with a slight touch of green; for plums, the so-called
violet with a very little red; for strawberries, red, touched with
yellow to simulate the seeds--and so on indefinitely.




IX

POTATO CARAMEL


Three receipts are given for potato caramels and one for opera caramels.
It should be noted that opera caramels and the ordinary potato caramels
are as different as fudge and taffy. The first of the receipts for
potato caramels is by all odds the best, but it means much hard work.
The second is much easier, but the results, while good to eat, are not
so pleasing in looks or consistency. The third is a compromise. In none,
owing to the very slow cooking, is it possible to use a thermometer to
advantage. The old tests, supplemented by a sort of intuition that old
candy-makers call "caramel sense" will have to be used to determine when
cookings are completed. But with good fortune and a little
experimenting, the amateur confectioner's judgment will soon become
accurate.


Potato Caramel No. 1.

Stir well one pound of sugar, one cupful of milk, one cupful of Irish
potato--boiled and sifted as directed before--two tablespoonfuls of
butter and one-half teaspoonful of salt. Boil until thick, and thin with
one-half cupful of milk, and again cook until thick; again thin with
one-half cupful of milk and cook until the mass is of caramel
consistency, tested in cold water. Stir as little as possible, but be
careful that the mass does not stick to the bottom of the kettle. Pour
on a well oiled marble between candy bars. Dry two days, cut in strips
and dry again before finally cutting in squares. Place them in a cold
place for several hours and then wrap them in parchment paper. They keep
well.

This is the kind of potato caramel that is especially good for chocolate
coating, although all of the potato caramels can be chocolate coated.
Make the caramels as above and allow them to dry in the open air for
several hours and then cover with chocolate.

The process is fully as laborious as it sounds, but the results are more
than worth the trouble. The repeated cookings give the characteristic
caramel taste and color. The following receipt, however, means less
work.


Potato Caramel No. 2.

Boil together one cupful of granulated sugar, one cupful of coffee A
sugar, one-half cupful of Irish potato--treated as before--one
tablespoonful of butter, one cupful of milk, caramel coloring. Stir
continually until the mass forms a soft ball in cold water. Then pour it
onto a well oiled marble between candy bars.


Potato Caramel No. 3.

Boil one pound of brown sugar, one cupful of milk, a piece of butter the
size of a walnut, and one-quarter cupful of Irish potato--prepared as
before--until a bit dipped from the mass will form a firm ball in cold
water. Stir as little as possible. Pour on an oiled marble between candy
bars. The result is more like fudge but is cooked to dryness without
being grained by beating.


Opera Caramel.

To two cupsful of sugar, one cupful Irish potato boiled, drained and
forced through a fine sieve, add one tablespoonful of butter and thin
with one-half cupful of milk. Cook until thick; remove from the fire.
Put in one-half cupful of milk again. Cook until thick, remove from the
fire and add one-half cupful of milk. Return the pan to the fire again.
This is the last time. It is wise to place an asbestos mat under the
saucepan. Cook until very thick--until a soft ball can be formed in cold
water.

After the mass has been removed from the fire, add one cupful of broken
walnut meats, and one cupful of bon-bon cream, broken in small pieces so
that it will be distributed quickly through the mass without much
stirring and pour the mixture between candy-bars on an oiled marble.
When cold cut it into squares; for home use it will not need wrapping.

As with potato caramel No. 1, this confection is most pleasantly
susceptible to chocolate coating. Allow it to dry in the open air for
several hours and then cover with chocolate as usual.

Broken nut meats can be added to any of the caramel recipes above.




X

POTATO--MISCELLANEOUS


Potatoes are probably the most useful vegetable known to the maker of
vegetable confectionery. As has been explained in the preceding
chapters, they are the basis of potato fondant and potato paste, both of
which are basic mixtures.

The usefulness of the potato does not end with decorative candy. In the
form both of paste and fondant and prepared in other ways, it is
responsible for several pleasing new confections.

=Mocha Walnuts.=--To the yolk of one egg beaten to a cream, add one-half
cupful of Irish potato--boiled, drained, and forced through a sieve as
described before--and one teaspoonful of coffee extract. Gradually stir
in confectioner's sugar until the mass can be made into soft balls.
Flatten these balls, press on walnut meats, and spread to dry. If
desired for packing, dip them into a crystal cooked to two hundred and
twenty degrees. To insure a good surface and keep the cream from drying
out, it may be well to dip the candy again after letting it dry a day.

See No. 8 in the frontispiece.

=Pecan Creams.=--The process for making them is the same as that
described for making mocha walnuts except that lemon or vanilla extract
is used instead of coffee,--see No. 14 of the frontispiece--and pecan
meats, instead of walnut meats. Indeed, the imaginative candy-cook will
be able to invent for herself several other new confections built upon
this same principle.

=Raisin Creams.=--To make them, form potato fondant--directions for
which are given on page 61--into balls and place a seeded raisin on each
side. Cook a crystal syrup to two hundred and twenty-eight degrees and
keep it warm by the use of the steam bath. Into it, dip, one by one, the
fondant balls, prepared as above. Dry on racks. If desired, ordinary
bon-bon cream, flavored and colored to suit the cook's fancy, may be
substituted for the potato fondant. A satisfactory variety is given
these raisin creams by pulling the raisin entirely over a pecan meat
before attaching to the cream. This confection is rich in flavor and
most attractive in shape.

=Peppermint Chocolates.=--Potato paste--described on page 52--is the
basis for them. Make a softer paste by using less sugar, work in
peppermint to taste, form it into balls, flatten and dry for a couple of
hours. Then dip them in chocolate as usual. After the finished candy has
stood for a time long enough for the chocolate covering to have mellowed
the center, the result will be a cream of excellent flavor and a texture
unusually attractive because of its grain. The difference between this
and the ordinary peppermint chocolate is so great that they really are
not the same confection.

=Celtic Almonds.=--This attractive confection is in reality a cream, but
a cream so different from the ordinary nut cream that it seems to fall
into a separate class. In place of the usual richness, there is here a
delicacy of flavor and clearness of outline that is a distinctly
enjoyable addition to confectionery.

Blanch almonds, split them, and dry in a soft cloth. Color potato
fondant pink and flavor it with rose. Roll fondant so prepared into
small balls, and place upon each side of each a split almond. Each piece
should then be made to imitate as clearly as possible the shape of the
real almond. The ideal result is a confection that is very little larger
than the real almond with a thin layer of cream between translucent nut
meats. After a little experimentation, persuasive fingers can accomplish
this result. When fashioned, dip the candies into a crystal syrup cooked
to two hundred and twenty-five degrees and roll in granulated sugar.

Walnuts or pecans can be treated in the same way with white or colored
fondant. The result, however, will not be so distinctively dainty and
will be little improvement upon the mocha walnuts and pecan creams
described above.

=Chocolate Bars.=--As the basis, take cooked potato fondant which has
been well kneaded. Form it into a sheet about one-quarter of an inch
thick. Cut therefrom bars an inch and a quarter long by a quarter of an
inch wide. Dip them in chocolate and let them dry.

A pleasing variation is made from the same base--cooked potato fondant.
Knead into it melted chocolate. A portion of the resulting mass may be
formed into balls and the rest rolled into a long piece as slender as a
pipe stem. This small cylinder should be cut into two inch lengths and
the ends pointed. Another method is to make small balls and give these a
very thin coating of white fondant. In any case, dry on a corn starch
bed and coat with chocolate.

=Vegetable Cream.=--Vegetable cream is another base with which much can
be done in vegetable candy-making. In itself, it is good to eat and can
be made to take many different and useful forms. To make it, mix two
cupsful of sugar, one cupful of Irish potato--boiled or steamed, drained
and forced through a sieve--one teaspoonful of butter, and one-half
teaspoonful of salt. Boil to two hundred and twenty-eight degrees. Have
ready one-fourth cupful each of preserved garden "ginger" and spiced
beets drained from their syrup; cut very fine, and spread upon a marble
slab. Over beet and "ginger" pour the cooked mixture, and "cut in" as
for fondant. "Gingers" are described upon page 101 and spiced beets upon
page 111.

Below, there are suggested five ways of using the cream. Many others,
however, will come to the mind of the experienced candy-cook.

Vegetable cream may be formed into balls and rolled in granulated sugar.
The balls so prepared may then be rolled in shredded cocoanut, cut fine,
or the balls without the sugar may be covered with the cocoanut.

Another possibility is to dip the balls into chocolate. Nuts may be
added, either by rolling the balls in the meats cut into little pieces,
or by pressing the meats into the balls and treating with the crystal
syrup, or by using a drop or two of the crystal to glue the nut meat to
the ball and then coating. Moreover, the balls may be used in their
simple form without any covering at all.

No matter what is done with them, of course, they must be dried off
before serving.




XI

SWEET POTATO


Sweet potatoes used as the basis for candy-making should be baked.
Boiled sweet potato changes color during the succeeding processes and
retains an amount of water that is likely to cause trouble. After
baking, the potato should be forced through a fine sieve. Make sure that
the sifting process is done so thoroughly that all fiber is removed.

=Sweet Potato Patties.=--For the patties, boil until very thick one
pound of granulated sugar, one cupful of sweet potato prepared as above;
one-half cupful of desiccated cocoanut, and one-half cupful of water.
When the mixture has cooked, add one-half cupful of bon-bon cream, cut
into small pieces. Stir thoroughly. As the mass begins to set, drop it
quickly on waxed paper in small drops. Act promptly, for the mass sets
quickly. The drops will not be smooth.

To improve the looks of these patties, they may be dipped in a crystal
syrup, cooked to two hundred and twenty degrees; and then dusted with
granulated sugar. If they are not wanted immediately, they may be packed
for any length of time not exceeding six weeks provided they have been
finished with the crystal and granulated sugar.

=Sweet Potato Knots.=--Cook until very thick equal quantities of
granulated sugar and sweet potato--prepared as before--and add a few
drops of oil of cinnamon. If another color is preferred to the natural
amber, add coloring paste to suit. Immediately spread the mixture over a
tin sheet upon which has been sifted confectioner's sugar. The tin
should be of such a size that the mass will be about one-quarter of an
inch thick. When it has dried so that it will not stick to the fingers,
with a long, thin knife, cut narrow ribbon-like strips about six inches
long. Fashion them into bowknots. Be sure that there is not undue
thickness at the center. The tools described in the second
chapter--particularly page 16--will be useful as will also be the glass
sheet. If the candy is moist, dip the hands into XXXX sugar. Dry on
oilcloth or waxed paper. When firm, dip into a crystal which has been
cooked to two hundred and twenty-five degrees and allowed to stand for
five minutes. Dry on a screen.

Their attractiveness can be seen at a glance at the foreground of the
illustration opposite page 138, and by looking at No. 18 in the
frontispiece.

=Sweet Potato Pastilles.=--They are made from the same mixture as are
the knots. While the mixture is still hot, drop it in small drops upon a
cold bare marble, and dust them with granulated sugar. When they have
dried for several hours, or, if possible, over night, lift with a thin
knife, place two drops together by their bases, dredge again with
granulated sugar to cover the edges, and dry.




XII

PARSNIP


Crystallization forms the basis of candy-making with parsnips. By means
of a modification of the old fashioned French hand method, it is
possible to make a confection that is good in itself, useful as the
basis for other confections, and of unusually long keeping qualities.
Parsnip candy, though the invention of to-day, has a pleasing old
fashioned taste and appearance.

=Candied Parsnips.=--In method of preparation and keeping qualities,
they resemble the candied flag root of our grandmothers. They are useful
to trim a box of candy. Peel the parsnips and leave them in cold water
for two or three hours. Cut cross-wise into very thin slices, drop the
slices into boiling water, and let them boil five minutes. After they
have thoroughly drained, put them into a syrup made by boiling together
one part of water and three parts of granulated sugar. Make sure that
the syrup really is a syrup--that the sugar and water have thoroughly
united. Add the parsnips and boil for ten minutes.

Next comes the use of a novel modification of hand crystallization--a
process that the amateur candy-maker may well afford to make herself
master of, because it is useful for many confections. Obtain a pan with
sloping sides into which the drying rack will drop half way. As the pan
must be used for candy-making and nothing else and as the greatest
strength is not necessary, a suitable dish can probably be obtained from
a ten-cent store. Stir carefully with a wooden paddle in order to make
sure that all the pieces are separated and that the hot syrup comes into
contact with all the surfaces of the confections.

Pour the hot mass over the rack--in position in the pan--and immediately
put a board over the pan. Make sure that the vegetable is evenly
distributed. The wood absorbs the moisture while a tin cover would make
trouble by causing the steam to condense and drop back onto the candy.
Leave the pan undisturbed for twenty-four hours. Then lift the rack out,
pour the syrup into the kettle and cook to two hundred and twenty
degrees. Return the vegetable to the syrup and stir carefully; each
piece must be immersed. The small pieces of candy will be heated through
in so very short a time that it is necessary only to make sure that each
piece has been thoroughly immersed in the hot syrup. Make sure that the
rack is clean and free from particles of the syrup. Thereupon, again
pour it over the rack arranged in the pan as before. Repeat the process
four times, each time cooking the syrup two degrees hotter. The result
is a slow crystallization which covers the candy so that it is perfectly
preserved and very good to taste and look upon. Although the work must
be distributed over six days, only a very few minutes are required
except upon the first day.

=Parsnip Boutonniere.=--The candied parsnip forms the basis of one of
the most decorative of all boutonnieres. For each of them have ready,
besides a supply of the parsnips, candied as above, artificial fern,
sometimes sold under the name "imitation air plant," a lace mat, a
number twenty-two wire, and one yard of ribbon one-half inch wide, the
preferred color. See the illustration opposite page 72.

Mix one cupful of sugar and one-third cupful of water, and color the
same as the ribbon. Cook the syrup thus made to two hundred and
twenty-five degrees. Into this hot syrup drop the crystallized parsnips,
and allow them to remain a few minutes. After they have become
thoroughly and evenly colored, pour them upon a wire screen. After they
have dried, attach to about two dozen of them pieces of wire about six
inches long. It is well to place a drop of thick syrup at the point at
which the wire enters the candy.

Cut the ferns into lengths of from two to four inches. Mix the wired
candies through the bunch of ferns, occasionally twisting a strand of
fern around the wires so that all wires will be hidden. Slip the lace
mat up over the wires and the ends of the ferns, wrap wires with tissue
paper and cover with tinsel foil, either silver or gilt, and tie the
center of the ribbon around the stem directly under the mat and form a
rosette. About five inches from the point tie the ends together in a bow
knot.




XIII

CARROT


To the art of candy-making, the use of carrots has brought a harmless
new color. Formerly the peculiar yellowish orange of the carrot candy
was a shade that the confectioner, amateur or otherwise, could not hope
to attain without the use of artificial substances.

The statement that carrots are valuable in candy-making for their color
must not be thought to mean that the confections made from them are not
very good to eat. Quite the contrary; carrot candies have a very
pleasing flavor.

=Carrot Rings.=--To make them, peel medium sized carrots and let them
stand several hours in cold water. Cut cross-wise into slices about
one-quarter of an inch thick and with a small round cutter or sharp
knife remove the center pith. Drop the rings into boiling water and cook
until tender. After they have thoroughly drained, drop them into a
syrup made by boiling one part of water and three parts of sugar to two
hundred and twenty degrees. Boil until the rings become
translucent--probably about ten minutes. Dry on a wire rack, taking care
that the rings do not touch. The next day, heat the syrup to two hundred
and twenty-five degrees and again dip the rings and dry as before. If
desired, when they are dry, fill the centers with bon-bon cream or
marzipan. When this center has become firm, dip the candy into a syrup
cooked to two hundred and twenty-eight degrees. Even if the centers are
not filled, it is well to make this third dipping; the thermometer
should, however, register two hundred and thirty degrees instead of
merely two hundred and twenty-eight.

[Illustration: Boxed Vegetable Candies]

=Crystallized Carrot.=--For this confection, proceed exactly as directed
in the previous chapter for crystallized parsnip, substituting, of
course, the carrots for the parsnips.

=Carrot Roll.=--From ordinary cream fondant or from cooked potato
fondant, make a thin strip about an inch wide. Place upon it small
pieces of the crystallized carrot, prepared as directed above, and roll
so that there is formed a long tube filled with the candied
vegetable. Cut this tube into pieces as long as desired--half an inch is
about right--and after drying until quite firm dip into a crystal cooked
to two hundred and twenty-five degrees. If the pieces are not firm when
they go into the crystal bath they are likely to soften and lose their
roundness.

"=Gingers.="--Preserved ginger is a delightful confection, but it is
expensive, and cannot be obtained in every town. There is a substitute
that when properly prepared has an added charm, because it is the
product of the candy-maker's own art. Note the box at the extreme right
of the illustration facing page 98.

=Garden "Ginger."=--Take white carrots, preferably of fine texture, boil
them five or ten minutes, scrape off the outside layer, cut the carrots
in quarters, lengthwise, and remove the cores. Then remove the point and
cut the remainder into slices about the size of the pieces of preserved
ginger. Boil the pieces in fresh water until they are tender, but change
the water frequently to destroy all vegetable taste and odor. Yellow
carrots can be used, but in that case the resulting confection will
differ from preserved ginger in color, although not in taste.

To every pound of cooked carrots add two pounds of granulated sugar, one
quart of water, two ounces of green ginger root shaved fine, and the
juice and grated rind of one lemon. Boil the mixture for fifteen
minutes, and repeat the boiling the next day, and surely once or twice
more; at any rate, until the syrup is very thick. If the boiling was
continuous for five hours, the moisture would be eliminated, but the
texture of the "ginger" would probably be ruined. The short cookings
give the carrots the opportunity to absorb the cooling syrup slowly. If
less water were used,--in order to reduce the time of cooking,--the
carrot would harden too rapidly to take up enough syrup.

If the "ginger" is not wanted for immediate use, it can be stored in the
syrup. The confection may be finished at once and packed dry, but the
better method of preservation is in the liquid. The open season for
carrots is very short and for the "ginger" is the whole year long!

To finish, heat the syrup thoroughly and then drain. After the liquid
has stopped dripping, roll each piece of the "ginger" in granulated
sugar, place the pieces on a wire tray, making sure that no two pieces
touch, and put the tray in an oven very slightly heated. When the
confection is dry it is done.

=Variations.=--Three variations are possible. If a sharper taste is
desired, add a few grains of Cayenne pepper the last time the syrup is
boiled. If a moister product is preferred, omit the lemon-juice and
rind. If green ginger cannot be obtained, substitute one ounce of ground
ginger. Ground ginger, however, must be boiled in a fine cloth bag;
otherwise particles of it will adhere to the pieces of carrot.




XIV

BEAN


=Candied Green Beans.=--Select well filled pods of green beans; wash,
and then cook until tender in water to which a little soda has been
added. Drain.

To a pound of beans so cooked, add one gill of water, one pound of
sugar, and one tablespoonful of vinegar. Boil this mixture for fifteen
minutes, and let it remain in the syrup over night. The next day, drain
the syrup from the beans and cook it to two hundred and twenty degrees.
Place the beans upon the screen of the crystal pan, pour the syrup over
them, and cover with a board. Repeat the process next day.

When wanted for use, drain the syrup from the beans. Cook the syrup to
two hundred and thirty degrees, return the beans to it, allowing them
thoroughly to heat through. Turn them onto the screen, making sure that
they are well spread. Cover with a board, and, after a few hours,
spread singly.

=Bean Taffy.=--Bean taffy easily takes first rank among all
taffies--vegetable or otherwise. The taste is good beyond words, and the
consistency is pleasingly "chewy" without being tenacious to the point
of teeth pulling!

Lima beans are the best to use as the basis because the skins can easily
be removed, but ordinary dried beans may be substituted if care is
taken. Cover the beans with cold water, let them stand over night, and
the next morning boil them until soft, and force through a fine sieve to
remove all the skins.

Boil together two cupsful of granulated sugar, one-half cupful of water,
a tablespoonful of butter, and one-half cupful of the beans, prepared as
above. After the mixture has boiled thoroughly, add one cupful of milk.
Add the cupful of milk, one-third at a time. Stir the mixture and let it
boil a few minutes after each addition of milk. When the thermometer
registers two hundred and forty-two degrees, pour the mass onto an oiled
marble between oiled candy bars so that it will set about one-quarter
inch thick. As with ordinary taffy, cut into pieces of the desired size.

=Nut Bean Taffy.=--Cut Brazil nuts cross-wise into shavings about
one-sixteenth of an inch in thickness--about the thickness of the pieces
of shaved cocoanut. Spread as many of them as are desired upon oiled
marble between oiled candy bars. Pour over the nuts the mass described
above. Treat as before.




XV

BEET


To the candy cook, the discovery that beets make good confectionery
brings a new flavor and a new color--one as desirable as the other, and
that is saying a great deal! In candy made from beets there are several
new shades of red which previously could not be obtained even by the use
of artificial coloring matter.

In case the beet color is desired for candies made upon other bases, it
can be had very easily. The beets should be boiled until the water is
colored red. Then this water may be substituted for the water called for
by other receipts in vegetable candy-making. The beet color will be
given but the beet flavor will not be. The result is a pleasing color
without the use of anything that is artificial.


=Frosted Beet Slice.=--Boil to two hundred and thirty-two degrees two
cupsful of sugar, one tablespoonful of grated raw beet, one-third
cupful of water, one teaspoonful of vinegar, and one teaspoonful of
butter. Remove from the fire and stir in one-half cupful of broken
walnut meats. When the mass begins to thicken, pour it between oiled
candy bars on an oiled marble so that it will form a layer
three-quarters of an inch thick. When cool, cover one-quarter of an inch
thick with a frosting made of one cupful of sugar, one-quarter cupful of
water, and one-eighth teaspoonful of cream of tartar, boiled without
stirring to two hundred and thirty-four degrees and then flavored with a
few drops of vanilla and lemon and beaten until creamy. When set,--a
quick process--cut the mass into pieces about one-half inch wide and one
and one-half inches long. If the confection is to be kept, crystallize
at two hundred and twenty-five degrees. The looks are improved if the
confection is then rolled in granulated sugar. Dry on a wire screen for
twelve hours or so.

Note No. 10 in the frontispiece.

=Beet Puffs.=--Cut one medium sized beet into thin slices, cover with
one-half cupful of cold water and cook in a double boiler until soft.
Drain, and to the liquid thus obtained add one pound of sugar; boil two
or three minutes. To this mixture, add one-half cupful of the cooked
beet cut into fine pieces. Cook this mass to two hundred and forty
degrees. Have ready the whites of two eggs, salted and beaten to a stiff
froth. Remove from the fire and after the steam has ceased to rise, beat
the mixture into the whites of the two eggs. Using a pecan meat to push
with, drop this mixture from a teaspoon in small puffs on waxed paper,
leaving the pecan imbedded. This mixture is very foamy and adhesive,
sets very quickly and must be handled rapidly. These directions will
yield about five dozen puffs.

A few drops of rose water may be added if a more delicate flavor is
desired.

=Beet Cubes with Variations.=--Beet cubes possess remarkable color
value. To make them, boil to two hundred and thirty degrees two cupsful
of granulated sugar, one tablespoonful grated raw beet, one-half cupful
of water, one teaspoonful of butter and one cupful of shredded cocoanut.
Pour the mass between oiled candy bars upon greased marble so that it
will form half an inch deep.

Four things may be done with this mass. It may be cut into cubes. If
wanted for future use it may be dipped into a crystal syrup to hold the
moisture. Children will like it poured into oiled cup-cake tins or any
other mold. If molded, care should be taken that the finished confection
is not more than half an inch thick. If the cubes are dipped into
bon-bon cream they will be of unusual beauty because of the pink showing
through the fondant casing.

=Crystallized Beets.=--Crystallized beets are fully as pretty as candied
rose leaves. They are particularly valuable in trimming boxes of
candy--especially "all vegetable" boxes.

To crystallize beets, use the process described for parsnips in Chapter
XII. After the last crystallization, however, the pieces should be
separated, dusted with granulated sugar, and dried on a wire screen,
instead of being left on the rack.

If it is desired to increase the illusion, add rose water to the syrup.

=Spiced Beets.=--Boil beets and cut them into cubes of about one inch.
Mix one cupful of sugar and one-third cupful of vinegar. Spice highly.
Cinnamon, cloves and allspice should be used, and whatever else the
fancy of the candy-maker dictates. Boil the mixture until it syrups, add
the beets and cook ten minutes. Remove the mass from the fire, cover and
set away for two days. Drain the syrup from the beets, boil the syrup to
two hundred and twenty degrees and pour it boiling over the beets. Cover
the mass and set it aside. Repeat this process on several successive
days.

=Spiced Beet Bon-bons.=--Take spiced beets and drain off the syrup. Cook
the syrup to two hundred and thirty degrees. With a wooden paddle beat
it at one side of the saucepan until it begins to look creamy.
Thereupon, add the beets, stir the whole mass briskly and turn it onto a
sieve. Dry the cubes on a rack, roll each in fondant, dry for two hours
and dip in bon-bon cream.




XVI

TOMATO


=Tomato Marshmallow.=--Very often marshmallows--even the sort sold in
candy stores of the better class--contain gums and glucose which the
amateur would find difficult to handle even if she felt no scruple in
their use. Tomato marshmallows, however, are pleasing in consistency and
more attractive in flavor than the old-fashioned kind. Moreover, they
are easy to make, although it is necessary to give more detailed
directions than would be required in the description of the process with
which the home candy-maker is more familiar.

Dissolve three tablespoonsful of granulated gelatine in one cupful of
hot water. Cook and strain ripe tomatoes; to one-half cupful of the
strained tomato add one cupful of sugar and cook the mixture to two
hundred and thirty degrees. Have ready in a deep saucepan, three cupsful
of sugar, moistened with one-quarter of a cupful of water. Upon it
strain the tomato syrup, stir well, thin with a cupful of water, and
cook to two hundred and forty degrees. Set the mass off the fire, add
the gelatine water previously prepared, mix thoroughly and strain into a
fresh bowl. Have ready the whites of two eggs beaten to a stiff froth.
With a French egg whip or a common wooden paddle, beat the cooked mass
hard until it is white and does not separate. When it becomes foamy and
spongy, gradually add the beaten egg whites and keep beating until the
whole mass is very stringy and will almost set on the paddle. Sift upon
the mass one tablespoonful of corn starch; stir well. Pour the candy
between candy bars on a marble well dusted with XXXX sugar. Leave ten or
twelve hours, cut into squares, roll well in XXXX sugar, spread the
other side up and dry off. Instead of pouring the marshmallows between
candy bars, they may be molded in corn starch. Store in a tight box.

The receipt sounds more laborious than is the process. The repeated
boilings are necessary to perfect the product. The acid of the tomato
destroys the granularity of the sugar. Straining the mixture eliminates
the particles of tomato which, not having blended thoroughly into the
syrup, would cause trouble by sticking to the bottom of the saucepan in
the later higher cooking.

=Chocolate Marshmallow.=--Marshmallows, made as directed above, are the
basis for them. Dip them in coating chocolate; the method of treatment
is the same as with ordinary chocolate marshmallows.

=Vegetable Nougatine.=--Mix two cupsful of sugar, one-third of a cupful
of corn syrup, one-third of a cupful of strained honey, and one-third of
a cupful of strained cooked tomato; boil the mixture to two hundred and
sixty degrees. Beat three egg whites very stiff, and remove the mixture
from the fire. Until about one-half of a cupful has been so used, dip a
spoonful at a time on the eggs, beating the mass continuously. From this
point on, use an asbestos mat under the pan. Return the remainder to the
stove. This time cook the mass to two hundred and ninety degrees. Pour
it over the eggs, again beating continuously. Thereupon, set the mixture
on the stove once more. The mass should cook slowly until, when tried in
water, a sample of it has the consistency that is desired in the
finished candy. Some people like the vegetable nougatine soft, others
like it "chewy," and still others want it to be hard. Stir in one-half
of a cupful of almonds, blanched and cut into small pieces, and one-half
of a cupful of garden "ginger" also cut into small pieces.

Line a shallow straight-sided pan with wafer paper. Pour in the candy,
and press a sheet of wafer paper onto the top. Let the mixture stand
over night. The next morning remove the candy, paper and all, from the
pan and place it on a marble slab, slightly oiled. With a long, thin
knife, cut it into strips one and one-half inches long, and
three-eighths of an inch thick and deep. Do not attempt to cut directly
through the candy, but use a sawing motion. Immediately wrap the pieces
in parchment paper.

Wafer paper, be it noted, is made from rice. It is easily soluble in
water and may be eaten with impunity.

=Chocolate Nougatines.=--If the nougatines are desired for chocolate
coating, the process is very simple. Instead of pouring the mass into
the pan, lined with wafer paper, it should be poured onto a greased
marble, between greased candy bars, so placed that the mixture will
completely fill the rectangle formed by the bars. As before, cover with
wafer paper. Over the paper place a board, kept in place with a heavy
weight, in order to make the mixture more solid. As before, cut into
small pieces. The process of coating is the ordinary one.

=Nut Burs.=--Cook one-half of a cupful of strained tomato and one cupful
of granulated sugar to two hundred and thirty degrees; add two cupsful
of sugar, one-half of a cupful of water, and two teaspoonsful of butter.
Let this mixture boil up once only; then strain. Place it in a three
quart saucepan, return it to the fire, and cook to two hundred and
forty-two degrees.

Take one-quarter of a cupful each of preserved garden "ginger" and
spiced beet, drain the syrup off and cut very fine; spread upon a wet
marble.

Over beet and "ginger" pour the cooked mixture, and "cut in." Form the
mass into balls, flatten them slightly, roll in confectioner's sugar,
and let dry.

With a sharp knife, cut on a board blanched almonds, pecan, and
pistachio nut meats into small, pointed pieces.

This is the method of using the nuts: Have the nuts spread thinly upon a
plate. Melt coating chocolate, and let it stand until cool. The
principles laid down in Chapter VI, "Chocolate Coating," should be
followed. Into the chocolate dip the dried balls and roll them over the
nuts. Make sure that the nuts adhere to all parts. Dry upon racks.

The brown, green and cream of the almonds, pecans and pistachios against
the dark chocolate background make a very attractive color scheme. The
nuts may be used alone, however, or different combinations may be
substituted. Other nuts may be drafted into effective service. If
peanuts are used, be it noted, they must not be combined with any other
nuts; the peanut flavor is overwhelming.

See the dish at the right of the illustration facing page 118, and No.
21 of the frontispiece.




XVII

CORNLETTES


Green corn has great possibilities for the maker of vegetable candy. If
fresh corn can be obtained, boil the ears in salted water until the
kernels are tender. While they are still hot, with a thin, sharp knife
cut down the center of each row. Press with the back of the knife down
the cob thus freeing the pulp but leaving the skin upon the cob. To make
certain that the pulp is free from skins, and of a uniform consistency,
force it through a coarse sieve. Note that the corn is not to be made
into a paste as was the potato. If canned corn is used, force it through
a sieve.

Boil together, until the mixture is very thick, one-half cupful of corn,
so prepared, one-half cupful of granulated sugar and one-half cupful of
coffee A sugar. The thermometer reading will be about two hundred and
thirty degrees. Add one-half cupful of bon-bon cream. Pour the mixture
into a rubber mold, or, if preferred, drop like cream wafers upon waxed
paper. If the mass is too thick to pour easily, add a few drops of hot
water. The quantities here given will fill a mold of four-dozen
size--the sort illustrated on page 10. After the drops have dried for
five or six hours, dip them singly into a syrup cooked to two hundred
and twenty-five degrees. On the next day they will be ready for packing.

[Illustration: Decorative and Edible]

=Nut Cornlettes.=--Cornlettes are a little richer both in consistency
and in flavor than the many creams to which candy eaters are accustomed.
By the addition of a nut to each piece, however, cornlettes may be made
still richer and still more distinctive candy.

There are three methods of adding nuts. The first method is to push the
nut into each piece soon after it has been poured into the mold. The
great advantage of this method is its ease and quickness. The confection
is ready for the serving dish as soon as it is cool enough to leave the
mold. A clearer and better finished appearance may be obtained by the
use of the second method. By it, the cornlette, when molded, is dipped
into a crystal syrup. A drop of the hot crystal is placed upon the back
of the nut meat to serve as glue, and corn and nut are pressed together.
When cool, the whole is dipped into the crystal. The third process is a
compromise. The drop may be dipped into the crystal as soon as it comes
from the mold, and the nut, either plain or dipped, may then be placed
upon it. When the crystal sets, the union will be firm.




XVIII

ONION COLD TABLETS


By supplying a more wholesome sort of confectionery, vegetable candy--at
least in the eyes of its friends!--has decreased the need of household
remedies for indigestion and similar ailments. On the other hand, the
newly discovered candy-making brings a definite contribution to the
family medicine chest. From onion can be made tablets that have the
virtues assigned to our foremothers' cough syrups and even are good to
eat, according to those who like the flavor of the onion.

Onion cold tablets, then, are offered both as confectionery and as a
household remedy. It should be borne in mind, however, that no household
remedy, however good, or tried, takes the place of the physician. The
family health is too precious a commodity to be entrusted to
unprofessional hands.

To make the tablets, cut into thin slices two ounces of raw
onion--about half of a good sized onion,--work the onion into two
cupsful of sugar and let the mixture stand for two hours. Add two-thirds
of a cupful of cold water, place the mass on the fire, and let it come
just to a boil. Strain the syrup so made into a granite saucepan, and
add one teaspoonful of vinegar and the amount of red pepper that the
point of a knife will hold. Place the mixture on the fire, and when the
mass begins to boil, put a wooden cover over the pan. Continue the
boiling for several minutes; thoroughly "steam down" the side of the
pan. By "steaming down" the side of the pan is meant confining the steam
which rises from cooking so that it will free the sides of the pan from
the accumulation of the mass that is cooking.

Remove the cover, insert a thermometer, and cook the mass to three
hundred and thirty-five degrees. Thereupon stir in one tablespoonful of
butter, remove the mass from the fire, add one teaspoonful of salt, and
baking soda the size of a large pea. Thoroughly mix the mass, and pour
it between candy-bars on a well oiled marble slab. As the confection
sets, mark it off in squares, and be sure to run the knife under the
whole sheet to free it from the marble. Unless the sheet is so freed
from the marble it will be sure to stick so that it can be handled only
with difficulty. When the mass is cooled, it will easily break into the
squares into which it has been marked. For preserving, pack the tablets
in tin boxes.

For those who do not like so much red pepper, the quantity may be
regulated to suit. The amount of onion used may also be increased or
diminished as the taste of the candy-maker dictates.




XIX

ORIENTAL PASTE


This confection is easily made from purely vegetable ingredients, and
has the pleasing consistency and flavor of the Turkish pastes. The
gelatine that is used comes from an aquatic plant--instead of from the
usual source. It can now be obtained in specialty stores and in some of
the grocery stores of the larger cities.

Cut one-half of an ounce of Japanese gelatine into fine pieces, and pour
over it two cupsful of warm water. Ordinary gelatine can not be
substituted. Let it stand for at least two hours. The results will be
much better if the soaking is allowed to take a whole night. Set this
gelatine water on the fire and stir it until it comes to a boil and the
gelatine is wholly dissolved.

Mix one pound of sugar and one-half of a pound of glucose; into them
strain the gelatine. Set the resulting mixture on the fire and cook it
until it is very stringy as it drops from the paddle. When stirring,
scrape the bottom of the kettle well as the mixture sticks very easily.

Run a half pound of figs through a grinder. When the gelatine mass is
cooked, as above, remove it from the fire, add a few drops of oil of
lemon or a teaspoonful of lemon extract, and thoroughly mix in the figs.
Dust a marble slab with confectioner's sugar, place candy bars in
position, and pour the mass between them so as to form about one-half
inch thick. If the candy is allowed to cool a little before it is poured
out, and is carefully stirred, the figs will not separate and come to
the top. Dust the top with the sugar and let it remain over night.

To finish the confection, cut it into squares by simply pressing the
knife down through it. Roll the pieces in confectioner's sugar, and pack
them in an air-tight box.

=Seaweed.=--This gelatine called for by this receipt is also known as
Japanese isinglass, agar-agar, and kanten. It is peculiar to Japan. It
is made from seaweed, the great unused resource of the western world.
The Orient alone to any extent uses seaweed as a food, and, of the
Orient, only Japan shows appreciation of its agricultural and commercial
value. Kanten is the product of five hundred manufacturing plants in
Japan, with an annual output of over three million pounds. The usual
commercial gelatine is made from animal tissues--skin, ligaments,
tendons, or the matrix of bones, particularly of horns and hoofs.
Seaweed as a source for gelatine appeals somewhat more to the
imagination!

Kanten is made from the gelidium family of seaweed which grows in deep
water upon the rocks. Coolies dive for the seaweed. They wash and dry it
by the seaside, and sell it at seven or eight cents a pound to the
factories for gelatine manufacture. The perfect purity of kanten is
proved by its use as a culture medium in bacteriological work.

Gelidium grows on both coasts of America from Canada to the Gulf. This
is true, also, of red laver which is largely used as a food in Japan and
unknown here. In Japan it is baked or toasted until crisp and used in
sauces and soups. It is palatable, and nutritious, being rich in
proteids. Red laver is not abundant in Japan and is being cultivated.
Sea farming is becoming an important industry under the supervision of
the government. The red laver beds are now rented out by the season to
the sea farmers with average crop returns of one hundred and fifty
dollars per acre.

Kelp, also, is utilized in Japan, not alone for glue, sizing and iodine,
but as a food--kombu. In this country, it is sometimes used to fertilize
the low-lying, barren lands near the shore.

In the marketing of the vegetable sea food known as Irish moss, New
England comes to the fore. This is a delicious food product used much as
corn starch for blancmange, jellies, custards, and puddings.

In a book relating to candy-making, why this information concerning the
unappreciated food value of seaweed? Because the discovery of the
possibilities that cheap and common vegetables can well serve as the
basis for the best candy may well be supplemented by the utilization of
seaweeds, valuable as a food, but now wasted. In the midst of her work,
the candy-cook may well stop to think that it is by putting cheap and
common things to new uses that the race will make material progress.




XX

STUFFED FRUITS


=Dates for Candy.=--For the basis of dates as candies, Fard dates are
perhaps the best because they are generally whole with unbroken skins.
If Persian dates are to be used instead, they should be of the sort that
come packed in single layers or in small boxes. The skins of Persian
dates are tender and when taken from boxes holding fifteen or twenty
pounds are torn by the sharp pick used to handle them. When cream
fillings are used, however, softer dates can be substituted if they are
carefully handled.

=Sparkling Dates.=--Wash, steam, pit, and dry. Fill them with rhubarb
marmalade, and close them very tightly. Brush the whole outside surface
with the unbeaten white of an egg, and roll the dates so coated in
coarse granulated sugar. If Fard dates cannot be obtained, select as
perfect Persian dates as possible. Fill them with rhubarb marmalade as
for the Fard dates, but do not use the egg coating. Simply roll in the
sugar.

=Chocolate Covered Dates.=--Proceed as above up to the point at which
the dates are rolled in sugar. To make the chocolate confection, roll
the dates in confectioner's sugar, instead of in the coarse granulated.
After they have dried, coat them as usual with chocolate.

=Date Brilliants.=--Wash, steam, and pit dates; fill them with either
vegetable cream or cream fondant. Dip them singly in a crystal syrup,
cooked to two hundred and twenty-five degrees. Dry them on a rack. For
fillings, a great variety is possible. Add finely chopped nuts or
granulated cocoanut to the vegetable cream, or use rhubarb marmalade,
tart jam, or orange marmalade.

=Rhubarb Marmalade.=--The fillings suggested for date brilliants are all
within the knowledge of the candy-cook, except, perhaps, rhubarb
marmalade. As the basis for it, wipe clean with a damp cloth stalks of
rhubarb. They must not be put into water. Peel them and cut them into
very thin slices. Cover each pound of rhubarb with one and one-quarter
pounds of granulated sugar. Let the mixture stand over night. In the
morning, boil it for ten minutes, or a little longer if the rhubarb is
not soft. Grind one-third of a pound of dried figs; remove the rhubarb
and sugar from the fire; to them add the figs and stir until they are
thoroughly mixed. Boil ten minutes more. The marmalade should be put
into glasses while hot, and sealed at once.

=Sugared Dates.=--Prepare dates and fill as for date brilliants; dip
them in syrup, and, while still damp, dust with granulated sugar.

=Stuffed Dates.=--Fill with any cream or marmalade and roll in
granulated sugar, dates washed, strained, steamed and pitted.

=Stuffed Prunes.=--The sort of prunes that come in boxes are better to
use than the ordinary ones because they are of a better quality, and are
separated in the curing. Barely cover the prunes with cold water, and
allow them to stand over night. One method is to pour the water off the
next morning, pit the prunes, and use them as they are. If the prunes
are moist and firm to begin with, the soaking is probably all that is
necessary. Otherwise the second method is the one to be followed. If so,
after the prunes have been soaked, place them over the fire and allow
them to come to a boil quickly. This application of heat is sure to
plump out prunes that have become dry, or have been over-cured. The
difficulty, however, is that there is danger that the juice will be
started, and much of it lost, and that the skins may be broken. The
second method will destroy the raw taste to which some persons object.

No matter which method has been followed, fill each prune with tart jam,
orange marmalade, rhubarb marmalade, or with potato fondant, cooked or
uncooked, with or without the addition of nuts. To finish, coat each
prune with the unbeaten white of an egg, and roll in granulated sugar.
If it is desired, they can be rolled in confectioner's sugar, dried and
coated with chocolate.




XXI

ANGELIQUE


=Rings.=--Angelique is a vegetable that is of the greatest use as an
accessory in the making of many sorts of vegetable candy. That fact,
however, should not obscure the equally important fact that its flavor
is excellent and that it may well be used as a base. Rings made from it
are very good if filled with any one of the four mixtures described
below. And, as the reader will see by looking at No. 15 of the
frontispiece, they are good to look upon.

[Illustration: Angelica Archangelica]

As a beginning, no matter what filling is to be chosen, cut crystallized
angelique cross-wise into sections a quarter of an inch wide. If these
sections are flattened by packing or cutting, separate the sides so that
they form circles, the more nearly perfect the better.

The fillings may be either potato fondant, plain or colored, and
flavored to taste; potato fondant with chopped nuts worked into it;
equal parts of potato fondant and almond paste; or rhubarb marmalade,
with confectioner's sugar worked into it if it appears too moist.

When the fillings are in place, each ring should be dipped separately
into a crystal, cooked to two hundred and twenty degrees, and then
should be allowed to drain on a wire rack. The next day the process
should be repeated. When the rings have become thoroughly dry, they will
be found very useful for almost any sort of serving or packing. The
outside is firm, and the centers soft.

=Orange Rings.=--Rings made from candied orange peel may be treated
similarly. Cut the peel into rings by using one-half and one quarter
inch cutters. Thereafter both process and fillings are the same. An
interesting combination can be made by arranging three small orange
rings in a cluster, and holding them in position by the syrup. In
addition to the filling, a pignolia nut may be placed in each ring.

See No. 19 of the frontispiece.

=Angelique as a Plant.=--Angelique or angelica is so called because in
early centuries it was thought to be a specific for poison and
pestilence. It is an aromatic garden herb, of an order of plants of the
cohort umbelliferae, known popularly as the parsley family. The order is
one of strongly marked properties. Some of its members contain an
aromatic oil and furnish condiments--as anise, dill, caraway, and
coriander. From another group these qualities are nearly absent and the
stem and leaf are edible--as in celery, angelique and parsley; or the
root--as in carrot and parsnip.

Angelique is native to many temperate parts of Europe and America. It
grows on river banks and in other damp places. It is easily cultivated
and often grows to the height of six feet. Its seeds may be sown in the
autumn as soon as they are ripe, or they may be planted in the spring.
Angelique develops a plant much like celery. It is blanched and eaten
the same way. The stalk is used commercially when crystallized or
candied. It is green in color and pleasingly pungent in flavor, and
lends itself in many ways to the use of the candy-maker. It comes
generally in strips six or seven inches long and is cut according to
the special directions for the different candies.

Angelique is so easy to raise and is of such value that two methods of
handling it when home grown are given below. Why so many candy-makers
with gardens continue to buy it when it can be cultivated so easily is a
mystery.

=Preserved Green Angelique.=--Select angelique that is fresh, young,
crisp, and as tender as possible. Cut the stalks into six inch lengths;
wash them thoroughly. Boil them in water for ten minutes, and drain
them. Thereupon, boil them in a syrup for half an hour. Let them cool in
the syrup. Store in wide-mouthed bottles or jars.

=Dried Angelique.=--Prepare the angelique as before. Cut the stalks into
strips, lozenges, or large and small rings. Boil them in the syrup three
or four times--as was directed before. After draining, roll each piece
in powdered sugar. Dry them thoroughly on a screen, and store
carefully.




XXII

FOR THE CATERER


Vegetable candy opens up a new field for the caterer. It furnishes him
material that is not only cheaper but better than that with which he has
been accustomed to work. Not only are the results better, but they are
achieved by the expenditure of much less effort. Potato fondant can be
made to assume clear outlines without the hour after hour beating
required by the traditional French methods. Moreover, the caterer's
customers can have the satisfaction of knowing that the pretty things
that they are buying are not made with the help of plaster of Paris or
other ingredients of which the less there is said the better!

The caterer should take particular note of the illustration facing page
138. It will suggest many of the uses to which the new mediums can be
put. The caterer, also, should read with particular care the chapter
relating to decorative candy. Chapter and illustration together will
furnish him with ideas as to how he can make use of this discovery in
his own profession. Of course, for success, absolute familiarity with
the processes of vegetable candy-making is essential.

There are a few definite points which should be borne in mind, however,
by the person who wishes to use vegetable candy in catering. Flowers can
be wired and used as bouquets. As will be seen from the illustration
facing the next page, to hold candles for use on birthday cakes there is
no need to use the objectionable wire cups. Smaller flower cups made
from potato fondant can be substituted. An excellent method is to use
them in the border. There, they are not only useful but highly
decorative. Nor need there be used cups made from starch, plaster of
Paris, or other inedible mixtures.

The possibilities of using potato fondant as the base for fancy cups to
hold ice creams and ices are unlimited. For instance, the fondant can be
molded into cups of conventionalized flower designs. The caterer should
remember that these cups should be dipped one or more times in a
crystal syrup. This will not only make them resemble somewhat the ever
popular spun sugar, but will tend to make them impervious to the melting
ices or creams. As a result, the fondant itself will retain its
crispness. A similar use is for novel containers for salted almonds and
nut meats.

[Illustration: For the Caterer]

One great advantage of the use of objects made from vegetable candy is
that they may very easily be made to follow the color schemes used at
luncheons or dinners. The color may be very easily applied to the
exterior or may be worked into the mass itself before it is molded. Just
how these operations should be followed will readily be seen by
re-reading Chapter VIII, division III,

          "DECORATIVE CANDIES FROM POTATO FONDANT."

For instance, if pink is the color for the luncheon, wild roses easily
suggest themselves as promising decorations. The form of the wild rose
lends itself readily to cups,--the larger ones for ices and the smaller
for nuts. If the function is a birthday, wild roses may well be used
for candle cups on cakes. If not a birthday, and decorative icing is
desired for large or small cakes, nothing could be prettier than the
roses. They can be used either as a border of conventional regularity
around a large cake or in the center of small, round cakes covered with
white icing. As a flower decoration, candy wild roses can be placed in a
vase in the middle of the table. To carry the place cards, there may be
a butterfly alighting upon each rose cup holding nuts. These butterflies
can be made of vegetable candy, water color paper, or bolting cloth;
whatever their material, they must be wired, or glued, with a few drops
of crystal syrup, to the edge of the rose.

If, however, the luncheon is to be violet, other decorations can be
used. The center piece may be a large bunch of pop-corn violets. At each
plate there may be French baskets, made from potato fondant colored pale
violet, filled with cocoanut violets. To give the idea that the baskets
have just come from the florist's, to each there may well be tied a card
bearing the name of the guest. In this instance, it would be well for
the ice to be served in a fondant basket and capped with a few violets.

The caterer will readily see that vegetable candy offers itself in
countless ways in connection with place cards. The new candy can not
only be used as the holder for daintily designed cards, but the design
itself may be painted directly upon the object modeled from potato
fondant or potato paste. The first method is likely to be rather more
easy in its process and attractive in its results, on the whole, but the
second has the distinction of novelty. It surely is an interesting thing
for the guests to be able to eat their place cards, decoration, design,
and all!

For Easter, yellow is a particularly good color. For ices, cups and
cases can be made of white and yellow fondant modeled in the form of
jonquils or daffodils. Carrot rings, served with the salad course, would
add a touch of variety. As is suggested in the chapter concerning
decorative candies, potato fondant can be made to serve the table
decorator especially well for special times and functions. Insignia can
easily be formed of fondant, either as separate forms to be wired and
used as place cards or as place cards attached to the little
cases--paper or fondant. A Masonic dinner, for instance, would use the
square and compass in different ways, and one for the Odd Fellows would
make use of their three links. For college banquets, the appropriate
Greek letter insignia could be used. In this case, however, the caterer
must make sure that he is not violating any of the rules of the
societies to which his guests belong.

For any decoration that is flat instead of modeled, the potato paste can
be substituted for the potato fondant. Thus, in the case last cited
above, many of the insignia can be cut from paste more easily than they
can be modeled from fondant. A tinsmith can easily make a cutter that
will save time if a number of the same design are desired.

The paste can be used with the fondant, either in the same object or
separately for the same occasion.

Vegetable candy can be made by the skillful amateur as readily as by the
manufacturer. No large plant or complicated machinery is required. As a
result, the girl or woman with a skill that is great, but a bank account
that is small, may find vegetable candy the road to a profitable
catering trade. If in a small town, she can--if she is sufficiently
skillful--fashion decorations for food that will rival the products of
the art of the city caterer. Moreover, inasmuch as she is put to
comparatively little expense, and is using comparatively cheap
ingredients, she can undersell her urban competitor. And her fellow
townswomen who buy her wares will have the distinct satisfaction of
knowing that her product is free from harmful ingredients.




XXIII

FOR THE TEACHER


The discovery of vegetable candy has been of great pedagogic value.
Teachers of household arts and all art are beginning to find that the
new bases are of great service to them in their class work. Before this
discovery, there was no medium which was of use for both cooking and the
modeling classes. Now cooking classes and modeling classes can be
correlated in such a way that much is promised both.

The processes in the making of potato fondant and potato paste
illustrate fundamental principles in domestic science. With the exercise
of a little care on the part of the teacher, their making can be as
simple and educationally valuable as the traditional first lesson in
peppermint drops. In the fashioning of these new candies, however, there
is more incentive to the child than there was in the cooking of the
old-fashioned confection, no matter how delectable it might be. But the
pedagogic value of vegetable candy does not fall wholly within the field
of household arts. As has been explained in the chapter concerning
decorative candy, potato fondant and paste are the basis of very
attractive objects. Their fashioning, obviously, can be made to teach
principles of line, design and color. Is it not safe to say that no
other modeling medium--edible or inedible--possesses this threefold
recommendation? Fondant or paste can be colored by painting directly
upon the finished surfaces, or the coloring matter can be worked into
the mass. In either case, there is a pleasing relief from the gray or
green of clay and its preparations. Now the child can model in natural
colors what he sees on his nature study rambles. Now he can make roses
in their natural colorings and shadings, and buds that are not wholly a
dull, dead green! Moreover, potato fondant can be modeled so as to have
clearer outlines than clay. There are two disadvantages, however, which
should be stated: first, potato fondant must be handled with moderate
quickness in order to give the best results, and, second, it is so good
that there is danger that the pupil will prematurely eat his lesson!

Because the finished product is good to eat as well as to look upon,
potato fondant as a modeling medium adds to the teacher's resources
another incentive for the child. In work with defective children, it has
been found, again and again, that the more senses to which appeal can be
made, the better. Do not the same principles apply to the normal child,
although with somewhat lessened force? In art work with vegetable candy,
sight and touch are not the only senses in operation; taste and smell
are in full play.

Often, teachers of both art and household arts are perplexed when it
comes time for the annual school exhibition. "What can we do," they ask,
"that will be properly illustrative of our work and, at the same time,
of appeal to the popular imagination?" It is hoped that vegetable candy
offers an answer to this question. Its novelty and hygienic value are
such that parents of the children are interested in it. Moreover, the
unusual interest of the children themselves has been known to react
upon the parents.

Suggestions for the details of working out the school use of vegetable
candy will be found in the pages which precede. The teachers should read
with particular care the chapter which refers to decorative candy, and
particularly the division relating to modeling. They will find many
hints as to how it can be successfully applied to their own school work.


THE END




INDEX




INDEX


  Abel, Mrs. Mary H., on value of sugar in diet, 48.

  Accuracy, necessity for, 3.

  Almonds, Celtic, 86.

  Angelique, dried, 135;
    preserved green, 135;
    plant, 133;
    rings, 132.

  Apples, red, as decorative candies, 70.


  Bars, for forming masses, 14-15.

  Bars, chocolate, 87.

  "Ball," "hard," 19, 22;
    "soft," 19, 22.

  Bean, 102-104;
    bean taffy, 103;
    candied green beans, 102;
    nut bean taffy, 104;
    pulled taffy, 104.

  Beet, 105-109;
    beet cubes, 107;
    beet puffs, 106;
    crystallized beets, 108;
    frosted beet slice, 105;
    spiced beets, 109;
    spiced beet bon-bons, 109.

  Boiler, use of double, 24, 25.

  Bon-bons, spiced beet, 109.

  Bon-bon dipper, 8.

  Boutonnieres, parsnip, 95-96;
    violet, 59-60.

  Brilliants, date, 129;
    date, with rhubarb marmalade, 130.

  Burs, nut, 114.


  Calla lily, as decorative candy, 69.

  Caramel, opera, 83; potato, 80-83.

  Carrot, 97-101;
    crystallized, 98; garden "ginger," 99;
    rings, 97; rolls, 98.

  Caterer, the, 136-142;
    coloring for, 138;
    cups, 137;
    decorations, 139, 140;
    flowers, 137;
    potato fondant for, 136.

  Celtic almonds, 86.

  Chocolate, bars, 87;
    coating, 36-40;
    covered dates, 129;
    in crystallization, 27;
    marshmallow, 112;
    nougatines, 114;
    peppermints, 86.

  Child, the, craving for sweets of, vii, viii;
    sugar for, viii, 47-51;
    Mrs. Mary Hinman Abel on, 48.

  Cleanliness, necessity for, 4.

  Climatic conditions, in candy making, 4;
    in chocolate coating, 35, 36.

  Cocoanut violets, 58.

  Cold tablets, onion, 120.

  Cornlettes, 117; nut, 118.

  Corn starch, for drying, 18.

  "Crack," 19, 22.

  Creams, pecan, 85;
    raisin, 85;
    vegetable, 88.

  Crystallization, 27-32;
    beets, 108;
    chocolate in, 27;
    crystal syrup, 28, 29;
    French hand, 30;
    basis for parsnip candy, 93;
    sugar, 28.

  Crystallized beets, 108.

  Crystal syrup, 28, 29.


  Dates, candy, 128;
    chocolate covered, 129;
    date brilliants, 129;
    rhubarb marmalade for, 130;
    sparkling dates, 128;
    stuffed dates, 130;
    sugared, 130.

  Decorative candies, 52-79;
    from potato paste, 52-57;
    green leaves, 56;
    potato paste, 53;
    violets, 57-61;
    cocoanut violets, 58;
    pop-corn violets, 57;
    violet boutonnieres, 59, 60;
    from potato fondant, 61-79;
    calla lily, 69;
    coloring for, 64-66;
    cooked potato fondant, 62;
    daisy, white, 66;
    daisy, yellow, 69;
    grapes, 77;
    modeled candy, 62;
    new potato, 75;
    parsnip boutonniere, 95;
    pea pod, 76;
    red apples, 70;
    rose buds, 74;
    single rose, 72;
    snow balls, 76;
    uncooked potato fondant, 61;
    white daisy, 66;
    yellow daisy, 69.

  Degrees, on candy thermometer, 22.

  Dishes, white enamel best, 12.

  Dipper, bon-bon, 8.

  Double boiler, use of, 24, 25.

  Dropping funnel, 11.


  Fondant, potato, decorative candies from, 61-79;
    calla lily, 69;
    coloring for, 64-66;
    cooked potato fondant, 62;
    daisy, white, 66;
    daisy, yellow, 69;
    grapes, 77;
    modeled candy, 62;
    new potato, 75;
    parsnip boutonniere, 95;
    pea pod, 76;
    red apples, 70;
    rose buds, 74;
    single rose, 72;
    snow balls, 76;
    uncooked potato fondant, 61;
    white daisy, 66;
    yellow daisy, 69.

  Frosted beet slice, 105.

  Funnel, dropping, 11.

  Fruits, stuffed, 128-131;
    dates, 128;
    dates, chocolate covered, 129;
    date brilliants, 129;
    rhubarb marmalade for, 129;
    dates, stuffed, 130;
    dates, sugared, 130;
    stuffed prunes, 130.


  Garden "ginger," 99.

  Gelidium, 125.

  "Ginger," garden, 99.

  Glucose, 46.

  Grapes, in decorative candy, 77.

  Green leaves, in decorative candy, 56.


  "Hard ball," 19, 22.

  "Hard crack," 19, 22.

  Hook, taffy, 13.


  Irish moss, 126.


  Kanten, 125.

  Kelp, 126.

  Knife, special, 12, 13;
    for cutting in, 14;
    palette, 55.

  Knots, sweet potato, 91.


  Marshmallow, chocolate, 112;
    tomato, 110.

  Mat, rubber, 9.

  Mocha walnuts, 84.

  Modeled candy, 62-64.

  Modeling stick, 16.

  Moss, Irish, 126.


  Netting, wire, used in draining fruits, 5, 17.

  Nougatines, chocolate, 114;
    vegetable, 112.

  Novice, help for the, 3-7.

  Nut burs, 114.

  Nut cornlettes, 118.

  Onion cold tablets, 120.

  Orange rings, 133.

  Oriental paste, 123.


  Packing, of candies, 6.

  Parsnip, 93-96;
    boutonnieres, 95-96;
    candied, 93-95.

  Paste, oriental, 123;
    potato, 52;
    potato, use by teachers, 143.

  Pastilles, sweet potato, 92.

  Patties, sweet potato, 90.

  Pea pods, in decorative candies, 76.

  Pecan creams, 85.

  Peppermint chocolates, 86.

  Pop-corn violets, 57.

  Potato, new, in decorative candy, 75;
    caramels, 80-83;
    celtic almonds, 86;
    chocolate bars, 87;
    mocha walnuts, 84;
    pecan creams, 85;
    peppermint chocolates, 86;
    raisin creams, 85;
    sweet potato, 90-92;
    knots, 91;
    pastilles, 92;
    patties, 90.

  Potato fondant, decorative candies from, 61-79;
    cooked, 62;
    uncooked, 61;
    modeled candy from, 62;
    coloring for, 64-66;
    calla lily, 69;
    daisy, white, 66;
    daisy, yellow, 69;
    grapes, 77;
    modeled candy 62;
    new potato, 75;
    parsnip boutonniere, 95;
    pea pod, 76;
    red apples, 70;
    rose buds, 74;
    single rose, 72;
    snow balls, 76;
    white daisy, 66;
    yellow daisy, 69.

  Potato paste, 52.

  Prunes, stuffed, 130.

  Pulling taffy, 6, 7.


  Racks, for drying, 17.

  Raisin creams, 85.

  Red apples, in decorative candy, 70.

  Rings, angelique, 132;
    carrot, 97;
    orange, 133.

  Rose, buds, as decorative candy, 74;
    single, as decorative candy, 72.


  Scale, thermometer, 22.

  Screens, 17.

  Sea weed, as food, 124;
    gelidium, 125;
    Irish moss, 126;
    kanten, 125;
    kelp, 126.

  Snow balls, in decorative candy, 76.

  Soapstone, used as working slab, 5.

  Sparkling dates, 128.

  Spiced beets, 109.

  Spiced beet bon-bons, 109.

  Steam, candy making, 24-26;
    double boiler, use of, 24, 25;
    steaming, 24;
    steam bath, 25.

  Stuffed fruits, 128-131; dates, 128;
    dates, chocolate covered, 129;
    date brilliants, 129:
    rhubarb marmalade for, 129;
    dates, stuffed, 130;
    dates, sugared, 130;
    stuffed prunes, 130.

  Sugar 41-51;
    for children, 47-51;
    for crystallization, 28;
    glucose, 46;
    rolling candies in, 5, 6;
    value of, 41-43;
    varieties of, 44.

  Sugared dates, 130.

  Sweet potato, knots, 91;
    pastilles, 92;
    patties, 90.

  Sweets, necessity of, i, ii, viii.


  Tablets, onion cold, 120.

  Taffy, bean, 103; nut bean, 104;
    pulling, 6, 7.

  Taffy hook, 13.

  Teacher, the, 143-146;
    potato paste or fondant as medium for, 144.

  Thermometer, 19-23;
    scales, 22;
    "crack," 19, 22;
    "hard ball," 19, 22;
    "hard crack," 19, 22;
    "soft ball," 19, 22;
    "thread," 19, 22.

  "Thread," 19, 22.

  Tomato, 110-116;
    chocolate marshmallow, 112;
    chocolate nougatine, 114;
    nut burs, 114;
    tomato marshmallow, 110;
    vegetable nougatine, 112.


  Utensils, bars, forming, 14, 15;
    bon-bon dippers, 8;
    dropping funnel, 11;
    knife, for cutting in, 14;
    knife, palette, 55;
    knife, special, 12, 13;
    modeling stick, 17;
    rubber mat, 9;
    screens, 17;
    taffy hook, 13;
    wooden spoon and paddle, 12.


  Vegetable candy, keeping quality of, ii;
    modeling medium, iv;
    sociological value of, iv.

  Vegetable creams, 88.

  Vegetable nougatines, 112.

  Violets, 57-61;
    boutonnieres, 59, 60;
    cocoanut, 58;
    pop-corn, 57.


  Walnuts, mocha, 84.

  Weather, influence on candy making, 4, 35.

  White daisy, as decorative candy, 66.

  Working slab, soapstone used as, 5.

  Wooden utensils, spoon and paddle, 12.


  Yellow daisy, as decorative candy, 69.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. =Bold text= is indicated by equal
signs and _italic text_ by underscores.

The illustration captioned "Fascinating to the Child" has been moved
from page ii to page 72 as that is where the text references it more
than once.

Second Illustration: "discription" changed to "description" (See
description)

Table of Contents, "Cornlet" changed to "Cornlette" (XVII Cornlette)

Page viii, "marshmellows" changed to "marshmallows" (Caramels,
marshmallows and)

Page 16, "particularily" changed to "particularly" (is particularly
useful)

Page 154, "66" changed to "69" (Yellow daisy, as decorative candy, 69)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Candy-Making Revolutionized, by 
Mary Elizabeth  Hall

